Referencia : Colegio de Traductores
https://www.coltrad-cba.org.ar/es/pdf/honorarios_profesionales_10_2018.pdf

846.665 palabras dividido por fracciones de 100 palabras da:
846,65 fracciones.
A un valor de $198 cada fracción queda el costo total del libro en:
$167.636


# Off the Grid | Re-Assembling Domestic Life

Phillip Vannini and Jonathan Taggart

First published 2015 by Routledge

711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
and by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business

© 2015 Taylor & Francis

The right of Phillip Vannini and Jonathan Taggart to be identified as
authors of this work has been asserted by them in accordance with sections
77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publishers.

Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation
without intent to infringe.


# Off the Grid

Off-grid isn’t a state of mind. It isn’t about someone being out of touch, about
a place that is hard to get to, or about a weekend spent offline. Off-grid is the
property of a building (generally a home but sometimes even a whole town)
that is disconnected from the electricity and the natural gas grid. To live off-
grid, therefore, means having to radically re-invent domestic life as we know
it, and this is what this book is about: individuals and families who have
chosen to live in that dramatically innovative, but also quite old, way of life.
This ethnography explores the day-to-day existence of people living off-
the-grid in each Canadian province and territory. Vannini and Taggart
demonstrate how a variety of people, all with different environmental con-
straints, live away from contemporary civilization. The authors also raise
important questions about our social future and whether off-grid living cre-
ates an environmentally and culturally sustainable lifestyle practice. These
homes are experimental labs for our collective future, an intimate look into
unusual contemporary domestic lives, and a call to the rest of us leading
ordinary lives to examine what we take for granted. This book is ideal for
courses on the environment and sustainability as well as introduction to
sociology and introduction to cultural anthropology courses.
Visit www.lifeoffgrid.ca, for resources, including photos of Vannini and
Taggart’s ethnographic work.
Phillip Vannini is Canada Research Chair in Public Ethnography and
­Professor in the School of Communication & Culture at Royal Roads
 ­University in Victoria, BC, Canada. He is author of dozens of journal a­ rticles
  and book chapters, and author/editor of ten books.
  Jonathan Taggart is a Vancouver-based photojournalist and member of
  the Boreal Collective. He holds a MA in Intercultural and International
  ­Communication. His photography exhibits have captured national audiences
   and his pictures have appeared in magazines and newspapers across the
   country, such as Canadian Geographic, Yukon: North of Ordinary, BC ­Business,
and The Tyee. Among other awards, he is the recent winner of the 2012 West-
ern Canadian Music Award album cover design.

Innovative Ethnographies

Series Editor: Phillip Vannini, Royal Roads University

The purpose of this series is to use the new digital technology to capture a
richer, more multidimensional view of social life than was otherwise done in
the classic, print tradition of ethnography, while maintaining the traditional
strengths of classic, ethnographic analysis.

Available                                Forthcoming
Ferry Tales: Mobility, Place, and Time   In Solidarity: Ally Ethnographies of
     on Canada’s West Coast by Phillip        Friendship and LGBT Activism
     Vannini                                                   by Lisa Tillmann
Digital Drama: Teaching and Learning
     Art and Media in Tanzania by
     Paula Uimonen
Concrete and Dust: Mapping the Sexual
     Terrains of Los Angeles by Jeanine
     Marie Minge and Amber Lynn
     Zimmerman
Water in a Dry Land: Place Learning
     Through Art and Story by
     Margaret Somerville
My Father’s Wars: Migration, Memory,
     and the Violence of a Century by
     Alisse Waterston
Off the Grid: Re-Assembling Domestic
     Life by Phillip Vannini and
     Jonathan Taggart

   Includes bibliographical references and index.
  1. Sustainable living—Canada. 2. Self-reliant living—Canada.
3. Alternative lifestyles—Canada. 4. Simplicity. I. Taggart, Jonathan.
Typeset in in Caslon, Copperplate, and Trade Gothic by Apex CoVantage, LLC

Preface

Off-grid isn’t a state of mind. It isn’t about someone being out of touch, about
a place that is hard to get to, or about a weekend spent offline. ­Off-grid is
the property of a building (generally a home but sometimes even a whole
town) that is disconnected from the electricity and the natural gas grid.
­Off-grid buildings are therefore self-sufficient for light, power, and heat.
 But as it goes, people who live in off-grid homes also tend to be independent
 for procuring other vital resources, such as water and food. To live off-grid,
 therefore, means having to radically re-invent domestic life as we know it,
 and this is what this book is about: individuals and families who have chosen
 to live in that dramatically innovative, but also quite old, way of life. We call
 them “off-gridders.”
    Off-gridders homes are, in many cases, experimental labs for our collec-
 tive future. The lessons they are learning today about living with renewable
 energy are the lessons we will all need to learn tomorrow in order to make
 our lives more sustainable, more respectful toward the environment, and less
 dependent on non-renewable resources. This book is an intimate look into
 unusual contemporary domestic lives, but it is also a call to the rest of us
 leading ordinary lives to examine what we take for granted about our homes,
 our needs, and our wants. We believe that this book will be valuable in
 courses on the environment and renewable resources as well as ethnography.
 We also hope that our work will appeal well beyond the academy.
    From 2011 to 2013 Jonathan Taggart and I spent two years travelling
 across Canada to find off-gridders and visit off-gridders’ homes. Sometimes
 we were able to stay with them for a short period of time. Sometimes we were
 allowed to take photographs and record video and audio. And sometimes we
 even had the chance to practice off-grid living ourselves through short stays

at off-grid cabins and homes. Altogether we visited about 100 homes and
interviewed about 200 off-grid Canadians, as well as many American and
British expats living in Canada. In sum we were able to find off-gridders in
every single province and territory of what happens to be the second-largest
country on earth. This book is our story of our travels, and ultimately our
narration of their experiences, their challenges, their solutions, their aspira-
tions, their ways of life, and their own stories.
   To make our work possible Jon and I had to fly on dozens of planes, ride
snowmobiles, paddle kayaks and canoes, don snow-shoes, ride ATVs, sail
ferries and small boats, drive on ice roads and city streets, and bike and trek
across many regions of our country. To render the intensity of that kind of
experience we wrote this book in the style of a travelogue. But these aren’t
really the pages of a travel essay; ours is first and foremost a work of ethnog-
raphy. Interviews, observation, and participation in the day-to-day life of
off-gridders have not only inspired us to reflect, interpret, and contextualize
off-grid living in itself, but also (and perhaps more importantly) to question
our collective, modern, on-grid way of life. Ideally, after reading this book
anyone should understand much more deeply what we all usually take for
granted about our modern condition in relation to comfort, convenience,
and connectivity.
   There is a certain irony about our fieldwork. As Jon and I zigzagged
from province to province to understand the meanings of simplicity, of a
more basic and Spartan life, and of an alternative way of living with modern
technology, we regularly lugged with us satchel bags and panniers full of
the latest visual and digital gadgets. Thanks to the material we collected,
what we ended up producing in the year following our travels is a hybrid
book that combines the written word together with sound clips, photogra-
phy, and video. In keeping with the purpose of the Routledge Innovative
Ethnography Series, we offer our readers/viewers/listeners our multiple cre-
ations, hoping that these will somehow reverberate and strike their imagi-
nation in meaningful ways. The companion website—hyperlinked and
referenced throughout this book—will hopefully serve as a great source of
information for everyone interested in sensuous, multimodal learning and a
new way of doing research and of knowing.
   Our writing crisscrosses issues related to technology, sense of place, life-
style, energy, sustainability, and everyday life. These are topics that cross
the disciplinary boundaries of geography, cultural studies, sociology, and
anthropology. They are subjects of interest to those keen on teaching and
learning about material culture, skills, slow living, and much more. We also
hope that our book will stimulate the sociological and geographic imagina-
tion of students enrolled in introductory courses and in qualitative research
                                  Preface                                   xi
methods, especially ethnography, as well as courses on sustainability and the
environment. Though each chapter focuses on a key concept and a particu-
lar topic, both the book and the website are organized by province/territory.
There are ten provinces and three territories in Canada, and therefore there
are thirteen chapters to this book and thirteen main pages on the book’s
website. Each of the chapters narrates our travels, describes our encounters
with off-gridders, and reflects on and analyzes the significance of various
aspects of their practices and experiences. All the photos are shared to evoke
a sense of what we witnessed, not as objective documentation. We chose
photos that we liked: pictures that Jonathan took to animate our recollec-
tions and enliven your vicarious experience. The videos were produced with
the same purpose as the photography and the writing: to tell a story and to
allow viewers to “meet” characters and see their homes, as well as to listen
to their narratives. Each medium seems to “speak” differently, and we hope
you will enjoy the cacophony.

Acknowledgments

Our fieldwork, this book, and its accompanying photography, audio, video,
and website could not have been carried out without the generous assistance
of three separate grants by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council of Canada. Additional funding was provided by Royal Roads
University. Steve Rutter and Samantha Barbaro at Routledge also deserve
our gratitude for trusting our vision for the project and seeing the book
through. We are similarly grateful to the four peer reviewers who took the
time to read our work and give us advice:
   Paul Stoller                  West Chester University
   Tim Edensor                   Manchester Metropolitan University
   Christopher J. Schneider      University of British Columbia
   Nick Osbaldiston              Monash University
   During the time Jon and I conducted fieldwork, Lindsay Vogan first
and then Kate O’Rourke worked tirelessly to establish and maintain rap-
port with several media outlets that granted us interviews and coverage
to make our work public. Lindsay was also responsible for the production
of two short audio documentaries on off-grid living, while Kate took the
lead in designing the book’s website. We are also grateful to Lindsay Marie
Stewart, who oversaw the extensive knowledge mobilization plan after the
book, video, and photography were completed. Finally, a big thank you goes
to Matt Clarke, who contributed his focus, dedication, and film editing
skills to our team.
   Several of the chapters comprising this book have appeared before in
different (often more technical) versions in a variety of academic journals
and books. For their permission to reproduce, we thank the publishers of
                                    xiii
xiv                       Acknowledgments
Transfers; Environment & Planning A; Body & Society, Food, Culture & Society;
Environment & Planning D; Cultural Geographies; Journal of Consumer
Culture; as well as Ashgate and Palgrave MacMillan. We are also indebted
to all the journal and book editors and reviewers who gave us feedback on
these early articles and chapters along the way.
   However, most importantly of all, our book could not have happened
without the kindness of the nearly 200 off-gridders who gave us their time,
opened their homes, fed us, gave us shelter, shared their experiences, showed
us their places, trusted us with their stories and images, and taught us so
much. Many of them also went out of their way to introduce us to off-grid
acquaintances, friends, and neighbors. This book is dedicated to them.
OFF THE GRID Dave’s House.i
i.
   For more photos, visit lifeoffgrid.ca.


1 Grids

I stepped off the small boat mystified, with my eyes fixated on a blue
heron conspicuously pretending to be ignoring us—in the way herons are
wont to do—from a safe distance behind Alistair and Eleanor’s home.
The 40-minute glide on the waters of the shadowy inlet had been swift
but smooth, punctuated by the predictable sights, smells, and tones of
Clayoquot Sound: cedars overcrowding next of kin in search of gleams
of sunshine, docks covered in a slimy sheen of freshly spilt sockeye blood
mixed with seagull shit, and stunted swells meeting the impassable resis-
tance of rambling channels and coves. No element of the postcard-perfect
but thoroughly familiar waterscape seemed to stand out the way the house
did though, as if hovering weightlessly upon the glassy ocean surface. Feel-
ing awestruck at the incongruous architectural sight, I wondered for a
moment whether the crane-like bird wasn’t indeed as baffled.
   “He’s our neighbor,” said Alistair laconically.
   “Must be nice to have discreet neighbors like that,” I joked.
   “Better than the otters! They’re cute, but when you live in a floating
home, otters are like 30-pound rats swimming under your house and chew-
ing away your foundations.”
   I plodded unevenly on the walking path while Alistair tied up the skiff on
his own. A long but narrow—three and a half feet at most—wooden plank
rendered slippery by the morning’s moisture separated the front door from
the mooring area. As Eleanor opened the door, I cast a glance straight across
the living room and out through the large window on the opposite side
of the house. And saw water. Cold Pacific Ocean water drifted east, west,
                                       3
4                                    Grids
north, and south of every wall and every window. No driveway. No fence.
No adjacent buildings. No hanging phone or cable or power lines. There it
was: a rancher on pontoons, right in middle of the wilderness. Shadowed by
massive red cedars and Western hemlocks, with its image perfectly mirrored
in the still, shallow, crystalline water surrounding it, dwarfed by the vertical
walls of Vancouver Island’s Bedingfield Range, Eleanor and Alistair’s solar-
and wind-powered float-house only conceded ingress to the rest of the noisy
world in the form of a radio, cell phone, and internet airwaves. Aside from
the ropes anchoring it on terra firma it was wholly cut off—the epitome of
off-grid.
   Eleanor welcomed me inside with a smile and a cup of hot coffee and
invited me to tour the place. Lush indoor plants and musical gear adorned
the unpretentiously snug living room. The kitchen window artfully framed
distant cone-shaped mountainous islands and lazy tidal currents. A small
garden patch yielded a few precious veggies in plastic pots. A motley crew of
barrels and buckets collected rainwater. Despite the infrequent ripples caus-
ing the floor underneath the couch to undulate gently, the domesticity of this
gently drifting abode oozed an air of serene normality, feeling surprisingly
cozy, comfortable, and safe. We could have been in any “normal” house, really.
   “Off-grid” is an abused expression. I have heard people say they’re “off-
grid” if they switch off their cell phone for a day. Others think that any-
one living far from the city is “off-the-grid.” Some use “off-the-grid” to
label people who wish to run and hide, to go incommunicado. Off-grid, in
actuality, is a technical expression with a precise meaning. Engineers and
architects—to whom the expression can be attributed—call “off-grid” those
dwellings that are disconnected from the electricity and natural gas infra-
structure servicing a particular region. In this sense we cannot even say that
someone is more off-grid than someone else. By this definition, a home
(not a person) is either off-grid or on the grid, period. Administrative bod-
ies, such as the government of Canada, abide by that definition too. And so
does this book.
   Off-grid people unduly suffer from a mixed reputation. Some people
lionize them as our civilization’s last homesteading pioneers. Others prefer
to stereotype them as oddballs, loners, hermits, bush hippies, and paranoid
survivalists. But Eleanor and Alistair were nothing of the kind. Friendly,
warm, and open about their unusual but seemingly idyllic life, neither of
them thought of themselves as particularly eccentric. Born in the UK,
Alistair explained he had learned not to take for granted the unimaginable
beauty of the West Coast. “It never gets old,” he told me, “it really puts you
in touch with nature’s rhythms.” The ecology of the place—illustrated with
countless stories—was fraught with its own needs, its own cycles, and its
own unique expressions. Living off-the-grid puts you in touch with a place
                                         Grids                                   5
in a way that people in the city never could understand, they explained.
Eleanor had even lived in a float-house before. She found the untied-up
feeling allowed her to live freely.ii “All I wanted was to look out the window
from my kitchen and see water everywhere,” she revealed with a glimmer of
pride in her achievement.
      No real-world home is a land of milk and honey, of course. Alistair’s
ingenious desalination system—the kind of technological marvel that
you’d expect Wiley the Coyote could assemble from one of those legendary
ACME kits—had been out of order for some time. And that very morning
one of their boat engines failed—hardly a novel event when your entire way
of life revolves around saltwater vessels. “And we could do without pesky,
nosey summer kayakers,” Alistair complained. Not to say that more human
contact would be unwelcomed; “I go to town once a week or so,” Eleanor
admitted, “but it’s not enough to maintain strong rapport with people.” No
one can ever be an island unto themselves; not even on an island home.
      I returned to my home the following day wondering whether I too could
live like that. I am no stranger to island life, to maintaining my own water sup-
ply, growing veggies, living life slower, filtering out unwanted television, social
media, or cell phone signals, but I questioned whether I could go the extra
mile and sever my ties to the power grid too. I puzzled over whether I had
what it takes: the ability to do with less, to rely on myself more, to embrace a
little inconvenience. I agonized over my lack of handy skills and my tendency
to tackle domestic projects with stress and panic, rather than the required
“I-can-fix-it” attitude that I admired in so many tool-box-endowed friends.
I tossed and turned, debating ad nauseam whether as a good ethnographer I
should indeed “go native” and practice firsthand the life I chose to write about.
      The prospect of going off-grid, for most people, rightly feels like tak-
ing a leap into the dark. Most of us have become accustomed to flicking
on a switch and, in virtue of the technological miracle called electric light,
stretching daylight deep into nighttime. Those of us living in the Western
Hemisphere, and fortunate enough to pay the monthly bills, are spoiled
with the historically unique privilege of being able to microwave our food
in seconds, tumble-dry our machine-washed clothes in minutes, and power
up dozens of digital gadgets all day long. Our homes can be warmed at
the twisting of a thermostat and cooled during the muggiest of summer
days. Our store-bought foods can be preserved effortlessly for months in
capacious freezers. Our bodily business can be flushed away in an instant,
out of sight and out of mind. So, how can we, and why would we, cut off
these lifelines? Some might say because our lives may have gotten just a tad
too boring, too disconnected from the natural world, too comfortable, too
ii.
6                                           Grids
lazy, too irresponsible, too crowded, too expensive, too confined, too satu-
rated, too superficial, too fast, too incompetent, and too dependent. There
be may some truth in these critiques, but I didn’t know if these arguments
would really compel me and my family to make the leap. Still, I felt the
urge to understand them better, to experience and practice them vicariously
through the everyday lives of full-time off-gridders.
An Ocean for a Fence
Many residents of the Western world have become accustomed to the
simple convenience of the automobile “trunk,” or “boot,” as they might say
across the Pond. In fact, vehicle manufacturers understand that the larger
and easier to access these compartments are, the happier most drivers will
be. So when sedans and even hatchbacks suffice no more, drivers move on
to the larger trunks of station wagons, SUVs, mini-vans, and pick-up trucks.
Aware of the carrying capacity of these tools, retailers have learned to sell
larger products, to build larger box stores, and to move their operations far-
ther away to the peripheries of our communities.
      In fact, the trunk is an ingenious mechanism around which many tech-
nologies have evolved. Trunks, for example, rely on the common domes-
tic driveway for their operation. After being used to load up objects at a
store, the trunk is opened by a driver at the end of this short but incredibly
convenient stretch of road connecting the residential street with the front
door—and voila: the goods are delivered to shelves, cabinets, and closets
quickly and free of back pain. It doesn’t end there, of course. With the addi-
tional help of shopping carts, loading dollies, and at times even elevators,
trunks and driveways make shopping and re-supplying our homes a rela-
tively hassle-free job.
      But not on Lasqueti Island, British Columbia.
      To reach Lasqueti your car must first be marooned on another island,
Vancouver Island. Lasquetians lock up their cars in the French Creek Marina
parking lot, north of Parksville. There, they begin the short trek across the
harbor, down the pier, onto the dock, and finally onto the stern of M/V
Centurion VIIiii—the island’s small, passenger-only ferry boat. Surely this
ambulation is nothing compared to a Himalayan expedition, but do imagine
the complexities of their routines. Like many other islanders, ­Lasquetians
try to minimize their shopping trips to the “big island” to save time, money,
and hassle. Most average about one trip a month. There are virtually no
stores on Lasqueti—save for a seasonal farmers’ market and a couple of
iii.

                                      Grids                                      7
shelves’ worth of basic goods at the coffee shop—so whenever Lasquetians
go “to the other side” they have to carry a lot of stuff.
   I arrived at the pier for my first trip to Lasqueti on an early summer
morning. Jerry1 was busy shuttling back and forth at a hurried pace. He had
14 more minutes before the ferry would leave. Besides carrying his own stuff
he was also helping Betty, a fellow islander whose gait was much slower. An
unseasonably cold summer drizzle was making the dock slippery, so I put
aside my field journal and offered Betty a hand. She accepted graciously and
asked me to help her carry the remaining large plastic bins as we hurried
back toward her Toyota. It was low tide and the dock rested on the pier at a
very sharp angle, making the climb to the parking lot steeper and trouble-
some for her sore hips.
   Coolers, boxes, bins, and large cloth bags like Jerry’s and Betty’s told the
stories of islanders who had become used to getting home without the conve-
nience of a trunk connected to a driveway connected to a highway. Hardware,
wood panels, bikes, pets, and everything else a trunk could accommodate
found space on the small boat for the 45-minute (on a calm day) cross-
ing, waiting to be carried off at False Bay, on the Lasqueti side. “This is it,”
remarked Jerry, “this is the real first big grid that we’re off of: the highway.”
   A few days before, knowing I wouldn’t have the privilege of driving
around on the island, I had bought a $99 mountain bike at precisely one of
those big box stores and driven it home in my car trunk. I hadn’t biked in a
few years, and though you don’t really forget how to do it, it’s actually quite
easy to consign to oblivion just how hard it is, especially on hilly, unpaved
roads. About an hour after getting dropped off at False Bay, I arrived at
Tracey and Grant’s place for our scheduled interview, utterly exhausted and
drenched in sweat.
   Of all aspects of off-grid life on Lasqueti, none seemed more important
than what Lasquetians simply called “space”—as the nearly three-hour-long
chat with Tracey and Grant revealed. A population density of 4.8 people
per square km2 made it possible to do many off-grid things on the island. It
allowed for potentially sustainable groundwater extraction; for many hill-
side properties to be blessed with creeks and streams, which were exploited
for micro-hydroelectricity; for small food crops to be grown; for waste to
be disposed of cleanly and unobtrusively; and for firewood to be collected
at a renewable rate. Tracey and Grant’s place was a case in point. Situated
on a 35-acre property, adjacent to a beautiful cove facing southwest, their
small cabin made the best possible use of passive solar heating, photovoltaic
energy, and all the resources available on their land. For example, in order
to collect rainwater for their micro-hydro turbine, they had dug up a pond
uphill from the house and channeled outflow with a plastic hose linked to a
simple waterwheel spinning and generating electricity 24/7.
8                                   Grids
   Availability of space and the privacy it afforded also allowed them to
shower outside, year-round. Fed by gravity from another nearby pond,
shower water ran through a coil of black pipe sitting atop a plywood board
facing the afternoon sun. “From 3 o’clock to 5 o’clock, in the summer, the
sun beats down on that thing,” Grant explained, and “heats up the water
inside the pipe very hot.” That’s the time of the day when they would have
a shower, using the nearby apple tree branches to hang a few toiletries. So, as
the clock inched closer to the mid-afternoon hours I thought I’d leave them
alone to their habitual cleansing and slogged back to False Bay in time for
the ferry ride home.
   “Space,” or availability of land, was not a problematic issue on Lasqueti
Island. Despite the broader coastal region’s inflated real estate market, the
utter lack of basic “amenities” such as electricity, natural gas, paved roads,
and car access filtered out demand and made it relatively affordable to buy
land on the island. As Karl, another islander, put it in a later interview: “You
don’t have to be nuts to move here, but it sure helps!” Space, however, was
bound to play a key role elsewhere. Even though Canada is the second-
largest country on the planet and has one of the world’s lowest population
densities, most of its population is concentrated on a rather narrow strip
hugging the US border. Density is quite high in places, and so are the prices
of land. To boot, Canada’s climate is very diverse. The West Coast’s wealth
of lumber, its copious water flowing free of ice year-round, its mild climate,
and the richness of its soil enabled lifestyles like Tracey and Grant’s, and
Eleanor and Alistair’s—this much was obvious. But where do you find fire-
wood in the tundra? How can you buy large pieces of land in urban areas?
How do you deal with frozen water in the rest of the country?
   As the M/V Centurion VII sailed back to Vancouver Island, I crunched
some numbers and came to the realization that to truly understand whether
the off-grid quest for a better way of life could work everywhere else I had
to stretch the grant budget and weave a vast journey across the whole nation
in order to meet as many off-gridders as possible. It wouldn’t be easy, but I
could check a few places off my bucket list for sure.
Tangles of Lines
Myriad lines exit and enter our homes. Wires connect to electricity posts
that power our outlets. Cables hook us up to telephone and internet net-
works. Other lines reel the world closer to us and our homes closer to the
world: paved driveways link us with roads and highways, pipelines tap into
common water reserves and flow into municipal sewers, satellite beams
reach into the atmosphere to download television signals into our living
rooms, and natural gas conduits allow us to stay warm and cook our food.
                                     Grids                                      9
Together these lines constitute extensive and powerful webs of material cul-
tural significance in which our lives are suspended.
    Our homes are not as immobile as they seem. From the phone calls we
make to the electricity and fuels that power our cars, from the daily com-
mute to special holiday trips, from the foods we transport to the supermar-
ket to the water we drink and bathe with, and from the materials we use to
build our houses to the forms of entertainment and social networking we
allow inside our homes, flows of energy constantly pulse and radiate within
our mundane existence.3 These flows have very recently become a concern
of social scientists who view their circulation and the operation of the infra-
structures on which they rely as part and parcel of complex assemblages.4
We can understand these assemblages as mobile “moorings”: “rhyzomatic
attachments and reterritorializations” that “configure and enable mobilities,”
or, in other words, “transmitters through which mobilization of locality are
performed and re-arrangements of place and scale materialized.”5
    Though historically all societies have relied on various forms of energy
and fuels, what is arguably unique to our current society is how deeply we
depend on the operation of the vast assemblages that make energy and fuel
easily available and their myriad applications possible.6 Made up of human
and non-human, mineral and vegetable, raw and manufactured materials,
these assemblages function as human history’s largest-ever networks of flows.
In common talk we refer to these assemblages as “grids.” Grids can be viewed
as socio-technical networks affording us with economies of “flows of energy
that irradiate, condense, intersect, build, and ripple.”7 These “meshworks”8
are “developing bundle[s] of institutions and technologies, understood as
non-exclusive and diverse organizations of knowledge-discipline-perception
circulating in a constantly shifting ‘parliament of things’: embodied subjects,
machines, texts and metaphors and the like.”9
    Grids of light, speed, and power can make life comfortable and c­ onvenient,10
but they are also troublesome companions.11 One key source of such trouble
resides in the concentration of politico-economic power that grids rely upon,
with consequences for the costs and control of their utilization. Another source
of trouble lies in the over-dependence patterns in which they hook their
users, resulting in the global exploitation of natural—often non-renewable—
resources. These and related troubles are the forces that have pushed some
people to go “off-grid.”
    Off-grid means being disconnected from electricity and natural gas
networks, but the reality on the ground is a bit more complex. Off-grid
households capable of generating their own heat and electricity are often
also intent on harvesting water, growing food, and disposing of their own
sewage and waste without the aid of municipal infrastructures. These homes
typically also have a cautious attitude toward communication links, and may
10                                       Grids
therefore be cut off from telephone landlines or television cables. At times
they may be in remote places, even off the road. All these are interesting
lifestyle choices that no student can neglect, so while throughout this book
we maintain the technical definition as a necessary and sufficient condition
for being off the grid, we also remain interested in how the total or partial
absence of these other “grids” shapes these households’ everyday life.
      In light of this, we view off-grid dwelling as a “tactic”12: an often opposi-
tional (but also often negotiated, necessary, and contradictory) everyday life
practice. Off-grid dwelling tactics are “infinitesimal transformations,” “errant
trajectories” constantly “jostling for position[ing]”13 and repositioning, which
wind up “weaving”14 new assemblages of light, speed, and power. By delink-
ing one’s home from one or more grids, a household makes a more or less
explicit “technological choice”15 for a different type of social relations, a dif-
ferent way of life, and a different collective “synchronicity”16 with the rest of
society. Why and how this lifestyle takes place is the focus of this book.
                                           ***
      All I knew about off-grid living after the first couple of outings in the
field was that it was a radically unique existential quest: a simple search—
through many different means—for a better way of life. The importance of
such a quest is something I understood quite clearly from both personal and
work experience. I had spent years, during a previous fieldwork project, try-
ing to grasp why and how people sought a better way of life on small islands
off the West Coast of Canada17—and ended up moving to one of them in
the process. Though I lived in a BC Hydro-connected home, the off-grid
lifestyle resonated with me at an impulsive and intuitive level. But at the
same time it seemed so strange that a better way of life could be pursued in
the face of so many challenges that potentially impaired the comfort, effi-
ciency, and convenience of our modern homes.
      Unabashedly ignorant about wattage, amperage, passive solar design, and
inverters—to name only a few mind-boggling details of these homes—the
first interviews had yielded the feeling that I was in it up to my eyeballs.
I quickly realized not only that the learning curve was steep, but also that
the sights and sounds of off-grid homes presented serious challenges to the
imagination. From lavishly decorated outhouses and gorgeous barnsiv to
hand-cranked clothes wringers and warm greenhouses,v the technologies
iv.
09-682x1024.jpg
v.
03-1024x682.jpg
                                     Grids                                  11
and the architectural details of off-grid homes had to be seen and heard to
be believed and appreciated. And their dwellers—often bold and unique
characters—had to be “met,” however vicariously, through a camera. So I
posted a want ad for a research assistant job on the university’s website.
A few days later I phoned one of the applicants—Jon, an MA student in
communication and a professional photographer—and asked him whether
he was interested in coming along with me to all of Canada’s 13 provinces
and territories to film and photograph the fieldwork over the next two years.
“Yes, I think I can fit that in my schedule,” he coolly answered from his part-
time tug-boat job, summoning every single ounce of his English aplomb in
order to keep calm and carry on the interview.
   An avid camper, fisherman, nature-lover, and all-around outdoors enthu-
siast, Jon showed up for the first day of the most unusual student-job in the
world with bicycle panniers full of cameras, lenses, batteries, mini tripods,
and an iPhone with an alarm setting that sounded like a submarine. He
also brought a toothbrush, toothpaste, ear plugs, and underarm deodor-
ant—incidentally the very same four toiletries I had harvested from my
home bathroom. I, on the other hand, had been in charge of stocking the
pantry of our rented off-grid cabin on Lasqueti. My backpack contained
Clif bars, Kashi bars, dried pineapple rings, trail mix, instant noodles, beef
jerky, and juice. Jon took the Clif bars and I the Kashi, and we divvied up
the rest, hoping the trip’s budget would allow for a couple of burgers at the
only local pub. Once quickly settled, we headed off for the road.
Inhabiting Place, Incorporating Materials
There were only three lines stretching out of Daniel’s home. First, there
were two invisible but very important communication lines comprised of
electro-magnetic waves that transmitted a cellular phone and a radio-based
internet signal. Then, there was a steep, unpaved, rocky lane linking his
backyard to Lasqueti’s main road (so steep that I broke my cheap plastic bike
pedal trying to climb it, which, thankfully, Daniel replaced later with one
of his many spares). But absent from Daniel’s house were other lines typi-
cally found in conventional homes—such as wires conducting grid-supplied
electricity, and mains channeling fresh water in and taking human waste out
to municipal sewers.
   The building itself—an absolute marvel of vernacular architecture and
ingenuity—resembled a tall, wooden tower evocative of a Nordic medieval
style. Because he had ample access to cheap lumber at work, but limited access
to roofing material, he had found it more convenient to create space vertically
and thus minimize roof-related expenses—the result being a building of five
12                                     Grids
stories, each measuring roughly 20 feet by 20 feet. Over the next two years of
our travels it would remain unchallenged as Canada’s only off-grid skyscraper.
     Daniel was born and raised on the island and still lived there with his wife
and baby daughter. Until recently he “used to really live off-the-grid,” he told us
as we walked around his front yard under the lukewarm rays of a shy June sun.
He used to have no phone of any kind, no internet, and no electricity. Compared
to living with candles as he used to do, his current home—powered by solar,
with no backup generator—was nothing special, he found. “Back then, that
was something else altogether.” “Living off-grid is not for everybody,” he added
pensively. “If you want to understand if you can pull it off, you should try it and
go for a week or two without electricity of any kind. No appliances, no phone,
no internet, nothing at all. If you can make it, and if you enjoy it, then you can
be off-the-grid, I mean, really off-the-grid,” once again emphasizing the word
“really” as if infrastructural disconnection was the stuff of competitions.
     The coast of British Columbia bursts with small islands and remote
coastal villages disconnected from the BC Hydro grid. Lasqueti is only
one of many such islands that have never seen power lines. However, and
uniquely, several years ago Lasquetians were offered a chance to hook
up. They rejected it. Living without power bills, enjoying a strong sense
of privacy, maintaining self-reliance and resilience in the face of the fre-
quent storms that bring power lines down on the Georgia Strait, and
avoiding the need to upgrade homes to the utility-mandated standards of
advanced building codes, was precisely what they desired—much to the
chagrin and surprise of the large monopolistic corporation. For a long
time ­Lasquetians had simply lived without provincially supplied electric-
ity and all the thrills and frills that come with it. And most of them liked
itvi just fine that way.
     As Daniel told his version of this story, Jon and I silently began to
wonder where in the world we had landed. Gentle, exurban Gabriola
Island, my home, was only a few slivers of water down the Salish Sea.
Busy ­Vancouver, Jon’s birthplace, was also close enough from Squitty Bay
to be reached in a single day’s worth of paddling. Yet both places felt a
whole galaxy away. It was as if we had reached the Annapurna Range of
Nepal. As in the Himalayas, life on Lasqueti felt unpretentious yet not
unexamined, laborious and yet simple, busy and yet not hectic, involved
and yet not stressful. It felt as if Lasquetians were in their own time zone,
operating a hand-wound clock that marked the rhythms of a life pace of
their very setting. An islander had captured this feeling with a few care-
fully chosen words the day before: “If you want everything to happen
quickly, you are in the wrong place.”
vi.
                                            Grids                                     13
      But besides a keen appreciation of slowness, Lasquetians also seemed to
cultivate an aesthetic of quiet and darkness. Tall, lush vegetationvii dimmed
sunlight and hampered the movement of sound waves effortlessly. The
foot-passenger-only ferry muffled car traffic noise. Limited power curtailed
commerce and annihilated neon lights. The sheer absence of public street
lighting rendered the place pitch-dark—indeed so uniformly tenebrous that
suppliers of the only vending machine at the pub had even found it profit-
able to sell flashlights and batteries. The dark evenings at our cabin moved
slowly. We read books, often seated on a log on the beach below, until dusk
gave way to night and our minds and eyes gave up on the day.
      Both Jon and I felt it would have been easy to fall irreparably in love with
Lasqueti, had it not been for the biking. Or maybe the problem was just with
cheap, heavy mountain bikes. Jon’s crossover road/mountain bike seemed
to handle the terrain slightly better than mine, though both of us were
constantly preoccupied with double-checking our tires for flats and making
minor repairsviii with improvised tools and parts. Continuously having to
dodge feral goats and puddles of mud did not exactly put our minds at ease
on the road either. To boot, our lovely cabin, the Driftwood Cove Beach
House,ix was situated at the very southern end of the island and our inter-
view plan—and I use the word “plan” sardonically—every single day seemed
to call for morning interviews in the north end, followed by early afternoon
ones in the south end, and late afternoon visits back on the northern tip of
the island. I had no one to blame for that but myself, which made logging
50 km all those days even more aggravating.
      Our northern end visit with Dave was planned, unsurprisingly, for the
late afternoon: a brilliantly conceived time to master an incredibly precipi-
tous hill that not even our lowest gears could conquer. Once the road ceased
being useful the walking trail to Dave’s house—carved out of low-hanging
conifers overgrown over basaltic bedrock—proved to be barely wide enough
for our backpacks, leading us to wonder how anyone could have shipped
here the material necessary to build a house.
      Tall, lean, confident Dave was a committed, intelligent, well-informed
environmentalist who divided his time between Vancouver and Lasqueti. He
had lived on Lasqueti for nine years at the time, and spent most of his days
there building his dream eco-friendly home. For the first six years he had lived
in a tent pegged toward the bottom of his property, and for the last three years
vii.
1024x682.jpg
viii.
1024x682.jpg
ix.
14                                        Grids
he had upgraded to a cob shed,x to which he was now adding a greenhouse.
In the meantime he was also working toward building the final home just
down the path. As we sat down around the outdoor table to discuss off-grid
living, Dave offered us a plate of greens from his garden, a snack that—given
our rapidly dwindling supply of Clif and Kashi bars—was truly life-saving.
     But there was little time for munchies, as we soon began to scuttle around
the 11 1/3-acre property to understand the functionality of his strategi-
cally scattered operations. Dave told us he wanted to rely on renewable
resources and to pass on his skills, values, and technologies to his six-year-
old daughter. For her the future would be much different—he predicted as
we walked—because life on the planet won’t be the same as we’ve known.
Dave’s argument wasn’t driven by paranoia. It was hard to disagree with him:
read any newspaper or watch any newscast and you won’t help feeling the
same way. Dwindling supplies of energy and food resources, a fast-growing
worldwide population, and an increasing appetite for a consumerist way
of life that could be sustained only by exploiting several planets, seem to
make for a perfectly volatile and explosive mix, striking fear and anxiety for
our collective future. Off-grid living was just a simple response to all this.
If there was any core political component to the off-grid quest for a better
life it was the sense that, by living somewhat more independently from this
world run amok, at least you could feel you were doing something about it.
     We began our tour from the highest and sunniest point atop the rocky hill,
where Dave had placed—right on the ground, resting on the bare rock—two
small metal- and glass-sided containers. Inside each of the containers was a
steaming pot that had formed a great deal of condensation on the glass cover.
As Jon and I stared, looking as if we had caught sight of two steaming gremlins,
Dave excused himself, interrupting the conversation as he bent down to pick
up each of the two quixotic containers. He lifted them gingerly and moved
them a few feet. He didn’t have to be extra perceptive to sense that our jaws
had dropped.
     “Guys, you’ve seen these before, right?”
     “Yeah, kind of . . .” I mumbled, “. . . actually, no.”
     “They’re solar ovens. They work like a normal oven. I’m just cooking din-
ner in them. You see, the water is going to be boiling soon for the pasta in this
one, and I’m making tomato sauce in the other one.” The trick, he explained,
was to move them around throughout the day as the sun played peak-a-boo
with the trees as it moved east to west. Depending on cloud cover and tem-
perature it could take anywhere from an hour to a full day to cook a “normal”
meal. I wish I had inquired about the preparation of a Thanksgiving dinner.
x.
682x1024.jpg
                                           Grids                                     15
     Sun ovens were not the only off-grid tools that required being moved
around in different ways throughout the day and the seasons in order to
maintain harmony with the movement of the sun, the temperatures, and the
winds. The angle of solar panels had to be adjusted for maximum efficiency,
especially at northern latitudes, for example. And for those who owned them,
solar shower-bags needed to be shifted around, among many other tasks. “I
plan every movement very carefully,” Dave confided as we started walking
toward the bottom of the hill, “whenever I go up or down the path I want to
make sure I pick up or drop off whatever I need to while I’m on my way to
doing something else.” And we could see why: the trail down to his cob oven
was narrow and steep, and even steeper was the one up to his micro-hydroxi
station and 3,000-gallon water tank—which, we learned, he “rolled” down
to its current location through the bushes from the upper road.
     Indeed, living in an off-grid homestead was an exercise in geographical
choreography. From making the most of a stream for micro-hydro power,
to integrating passive solar into a house’s active heating system, and from
exploiting gravity to feed water into domestic pipes, to maximizing the fer-
tility of a garden, designing and maintaining an efficient off-grid homestead
was like line-dancing with nature and technology.
     But of all these movements nothing impressed me more than Dave’s
bicycle-powered transport. Few, very few, off-gridders across Canada were
able or willing to surrender their automobile. Indeed we would only meet
less than half a dozen carless ones over the next two years. In part this
is because not all off-gridders practiced their lifestyle in order to reduce
their carbon footprint; in larger part it is because off-grid life was generally
practiced in rural locations that had no public transport. Unfazed by the
latter challenge, Dave relied on a recumbent bike to commute the 4 km to
“downtown” Lasqueti, where he boarded the bike on the ferry, and then from
French Creek to Departure Bay in Nanaimo—for a treacherous 39.7 km in
the emergency lane of busy Highway 19. At Departure Bay he would then
catch the ferry to Horseshoe Bay, on the mainland. There he pedaled up
and down the even busier Upper Levels Highway for the remaining 20 km
to downtown Vancouver, as busy urban drivers whizzed by him at speeds
of over 100 km/h. “A recumbent bike is great for your upper body,” Dave
remarked, “it’s so comfortable that at times I almost fall asleep on it.” If it
had come equipped with a GPS detecting feral goats and mud puddles, I
would have bought it from him and napped my way back to the cabin.
                                             ***
xi.
1024x682.jpg
16                                     Grids
A place “owes its character to the experiences it affords to those who spend time
there—to the sights, sounds, and indeed smells that constitute its specific ambi-
ence. And these in turn depend on the kinds of activities in which its inhabitants
engage,” anthropologist Tim Ingold18 has observed. The experiences and activi-
ties in which off-grid home inhabitants engaged were undoubtedly different
from those we, dwellers of grid-tied environments, are accustomed to. And as a
result, so are our respective places. It is this simple observation that has guided
our entire interpretation of the cultural, geographical, and socio-anthropological
significance of the off-grid lifestyle.
    The different experiences and activities shaping our different domes-
tic lifestyles begin with the everyday movements of the fuels and energy
resources employed to operate our homes. Off-gridders, it was obvious,
needed to engage in unique movements and activities in order to procure,
channel, generate, store, and utilize those fuels and energy. It is those practices
that ended up lending their dwellings their particular ambience. Whether it
was wheel-barrowing propane tanks through bushy trails, channeling creeks
into waterwheels, directing urine at rhubarb plants instead of flushing it
down toilet bowls, or carrying groceries down a floating dock, living off-grid
meant moving around and inside one’s home differently. Off-grid living
was therefore a unique set of material practices through which domestic lives
were woven together in original ways. This required, on our part as inter-
preters, a different, material understanding of lifestyle: an understanding
informed by relational and non-representational theoretical ideas.
    Materials are not synonymous with materiality, according to one of the
chief proponents of these ideas, Tim Ingold19: materiality is an abstract
property, symbolically extracted from objects, conceptualized, and rendered
inert through analytical thought. Materials, on the other hand, act and
move without the mediation of our ideas and metaphors, he has argued.
For Ingold, materials are the media, substances, and surfaces that “partake
in the very process of the world’s ongoing generation and regeneration.”20
Though they vary greatly in their properties (like viscosity, mass, density,
etc.), fuels such as oil, natural gases, and biomass are obvious examples of
substances. Water, a quintessential source of energy, is also a substance. The
air we breathe and its currents in the sky, as well as the light (and warmth)
reflecting upon the surface of Earth are different kinds of materials: they
comprise the media in which we exist, move, and perceive. Though media,
substances, and surfaces are different from one another, they all are active
agents of a world in constant motion, undergoing continuous transforma-
tion. “Wherever life is going on,” Ingold has remarked, these materials “are
relentlessly on the move—flowing, scraping, mixing, and mutating.”21
    Materials, like energy and fuels, are therefore life forces continuously
acting and interacting with one another. Electricity flows, air masses blow,
                                           Grids                                     17
bodies of water stream. These forces aren’t abstract; their workings are real
and consequential—consisting of their flows, their kinetic doing. Water is
its flowing, the “wind is its blowing,” Ingold has observed.22 Materials of
all kinds are “hives of activity”23 that exercise their agency in virtue of their
own spontaneous movements and the movements for which humans co-
opt them. Our co-optation of these materials is what our habitation of the
world consists of.24 In co-opting them we do not arrest them, however.
Rather, we put them to use; we incorporate them into our daily life. Water
still continues to flow through a waterwheel, the wind continues to blow
past a wind tower,xii fuels continue to live long after burning in the form of
heat and carbon dioxide. In co-opting materials for the sake of generating
power, heat, light, speed, and comfort and convenience we become engulfed,
encompassed, and at times even swept away in their very movements.25 In
other words, we move together with materials; we become incorporated
together with them through a common environment. It is of these specific
movements and processes of mutual incorporation that habitation of the
world consists of.26 It is of different ways of incorporation that different
forms of habitation consist of.
     Different places are different bundles of movement and activities27—­
different meshworks28 in which people and resources are woven
together29—incorporated into one another. Different home inhabitants
incorporate their different places in many different ways. For instance, by
flicking a switch to turn on an electric lamp at my home I am in a way
incorporating the kinetic power of water channeled into dams, water-
wheels, and turbines by my utility provider. Someone who lives off the
electrical grid had to incorporate the same essential resource (e.g., water)
and assemble a tool (e.g., a turbine) to generate electricity. But the key
difference relies in the way our respective bodily activities unfold. For me,
a rather typical consumer of electricity, flicking on a switch is a rather
mindless and uninvolved activity. BC Hydro has already taken care of
the task of generating electricity, so I just need to get off my chair. For
an off-gridder, flicking on a switch required a different orientation: life
off-grid generally demanded a much greater involvement in the genera-
tion and use of energy resources and fuels. Indeed, for someone like Dave,
electricity had to be first assembled by way of making use of whatever
was at hand in the place where he dwelled and solving concerns as they
presented themselves with the passing of the seasons and the movements
of the clouds and sun, thus exercising caution, judgment, creativity, skill,
and physical effort.
xii.
1024x682.jpg
18                                    Grids
    As Ingold has noted, places are an outcome of the practices of their inhab-
itants; they in fact “arise within the current of their involved activity, in the
specific relational contexts of their practical engagement with their surround-
ings.”30 Because places are incorporated through these tasks, we can think
of a place as a taskscape.31 Everyday living is an ensemble of tasks and goals,
carried out in relation to the resources and tools available, as well as our prac-
tical orientations and skills. Living off-grid was a very peculiar taskscape, it
seemed. Virtually every off-grid living task required choreographing bodily
movements and activities with the naturally occurring movements of energy
resources and with the technologies available to harness them, channel them,
and incorporate them into domestic lives in order to provide heat, light, clean-
liness, nutrition, information, or power. Thus, off-grid taskscapes required and
enabled unique resources, rhythms, costs, effects, speeds, and lifestyles.
    Habitation is the central theoretical idea behind all our arguments in this
book. The principle of habitation is based on the idea that every organism,
including every person, is immersed into the lifeworld as an inescapable con-
dition of existence.32 From such immersion and the relations that emerge,
“the world continually comes into being around the inhabitant, and its man-
ifold constituents take on significance through their incorporation into a
regular pattern of life activity.”33 Therefore, by strategically incorporating the
world into their existence, inhabitants of off-grid dwellings became bound
together with these materials and with their places, becoming habituated to
particular matrixes of movements and practices. Like a mariner wayfaring
the seas, the off-grid inhabitant “watches, listens, and feels as he [sic] goes,
his entire being alert to the countless cues that, at every moment, prompt
the slightest adjustments to his bearing.”34 This involvement is how an off-
gridder generated her place and in the end her own way of life.
    But off-grid living also allows us to challenge and question what we so
routinely take for granted: our ordinary domestic life in the modern, on-
grid world. It sensitizes us to a different understanding of domestic assem-
blages than the one we are used to. It forces us to come to terms with life
in a domestic world completely or partially devoid of the presence of large
infrastructures. It pushes us to question how else life could be. It invites
us to rethink what our future—a future that will require a much greater
reliance on renewable resources and a much more intelligent utilization of
life-giving materials—might feel like.
    Off-grid living allows us to understand how alternative socio-technical
assemblages can be produced with the most basic and raw materials of life.
Off-grid living, thus even more than on-grid living, epitomizes how life
is a form of production—that is, a coming into being together with dif-
ferent materials—and how such production is an ensemble of activities
made of blazing trails and following new and old paths. A way of life after
                                            Grids                                    19
all, to conclude with Ingold, is a direction, an orientation, a line of move-
ment along which places are incorporated, “skills developed, observations
made, and understandings grown.”35 Perhaps, then, studying off-grid living
was about revealing the types of understandings, observations, and skills
required of the rest of us if we truly wish to re-establish our relation with our
endangered environments. Perhaps it was about revealing the ways of life of
an alternatively sentient body—a body that is “at once both perceiver and
producer”—a body able to re-trace for the better “the paths of the world’s
becoming in the very course of contributing to its ongoing renewal.”36


2 The Pull of Remove

Air Canada Flight 289 touched down on Whitehorse Airport’s lone run-
way on time at 1 p.m. The fuselage door opened to a crisp north-easterly
that stung the Yukon’s autumn-infused,ii Alpine-scented air remorselessly.
While Jon collected our luggage I secured the keys to a rental Chevy and a
couple of road maps. We swiftly stocked up on groceries in town and then
headed for the Alaska/Klondike Highwayiii with our compass set for the
Wheaton River Wilderness Resortiv—a 45-minute drive from the pretty
and surprisingly cosmopolitan territorial capital. The first outside-of-BC
trip had begun, employing a travel format that would remain essentially
unchanged for the next two years.
      The standard operating procedure was simple. Every trip would last approx-
imately one week; that was the time frame both the budget and our endurance
would allow. Each trip would feature about one daily interview—though we
ranged anywhere from a weekly minimum of four to a record 22 interview-
ees. This strategy, we knew very well, would yield first and foremost breadth.
Classical ethnographers generally seek depth, rather than breadth, by settling
down on one particular site for an extended period of time ranging from a few
months to years. As appealing as that longitudinal depth might have been, we
dismissed the feasibility of this approach early on. Given the numerous differ-
ences at play—off-gridders’ varying motives, economic capital, and lifestyles,
as well as differing technologies, climate, land availability, and so on—we felt
ii.
iii.
iv.
                                               21
22                                The Pull of Remove
that by concentrating on only one off-grid household, or a limited number
of cases, we would not have been able to paint a sufficiently diverse portrait.
We also doubted whether we would have been able to stay at anyone’s home
for more than a few days. Instead, by being mobile and meeting as many off-
gridders as possible, we thought we could achieve depth indirectly through
breadth—that is, by combining multiple fragments of everyday life gleaned
from all our 200 interviews into a coherent but diverse bricolage.
      Our standard operating procedure was also quite routinized. We’d sched-
ule every house visit in advance using email and the phone to coordinate
details. At best, every such correspondence would generally yield an address
and colorful directions (e.g., “turn left where the power lines end”); at worst,
it would yield nothing but longitudinal and latitudinal coordinates on a
Google Earth screenshot. Armed with such information we would then
embark onto often long journeys between destinations, equipped with the
hope that the weather would cooperate (traffic was hardly ever a concern)
and that at the end of each long driveway we’d face a rifle-less human being
armed only with an agreeable disposition.
      Often, though, at the end of those driveways we’d first run into canine
guards. The salivating Shepherds manning the gate of our Wheaton River
rental cabin looked like they had scared away grizzlies much larger than our
sedan so I slammed on the brakes at the very first growl. As I was behind
the wheel I coaxed Jon into opening the gate while I stayed inside in case
we had to peel off. Luckily, it was an unnecessary precaution.
      Robert, Carmen, and their two lovely kids lived off-grid behind that gate
with their several canine companions—equally well meaning, it would turn
out—at the end of a momentously long driveway set amid skinny, growth-
impaired timbers.v Like a handful of other off-grid families across the
country, they had enough acreage and spare lumber to build not one, but two
off-grid dwellings, so they rented one out to wilderness-seeking tourists and
wayward spirits like us. Carmen—like her husband a Swiss émigré—briskly
showed us around our cabin and taught us how to use propane lights and
the cooking stove, how to deal with the lack of electricity, where to store our
cooler to keep it (and us) safe from bears’ pre-hibernation appetite, how to
light the Franklin woodstove, and where to find the wood.vi Though the
outhouse wasn’t far, since we were both boys we could always easily help
ourselves to the bushes for urination. As for running water, there was plenty
of it in the aforementioned river.vii Saturday would be sauna day, and if we
fancied washing up that would be a good time to do so.
v.
vi.
vii.
                              The Pull of Remove                              23
    As the sun went down Jon and I broiled some char and opened a bottle
of spirit-raising Yukon Jack, idly chatting away about why, when Carmen
demonstrated how to use pepper spray to fend off ursine attacks, she had
stretched her right arm way over her head and pointed the nozzle several
feet up in the air. Both Jon and I turned in for the night trying not to dream
about how big these formidable beasts could actually be.
    The next morning I drove us south to meet Brian and Susan, some
150 km away. As one of our several common character traits would turn
out to be a hankering for routine, I got into the habit of piloting while
Jon always settled in as navigator—giving me directions while recharging
batteries with the preciously useful cigarette lighter and transferring heavy
visual files from the cameras onto his Mac.
    We had been referred to Brian and Susan by a governmental territorial
agency dealing with renewable energy. Though finding off-gridders would
seem to be an oxymoronic enterprise, between various organizations, renew-
able energy retailers, business websites like Robert and Carmen’s, personal
blogs, or stories in local presses and other media reports—not to mention
the number of off-gridders who actually invited us in the first place—the
only difficulty would be assembling reasonably paced interview itineraries.
    Our interviews would also generally unfold in a ritualistic way. After shak-
ing hands and dealing with informed consent procedures, I would begin with
a battery of conversational questions about the “whys” behind the off-grid
lifestyle, followed by an extended tour of a house and the rest of the prop-
erty for a hands-on guide to “how” various technologies worked. I typically
worked with my ears, while Jon employed his eyes, mediated by whichever
type of recording device (if any) was preferred by the off-gridder du jour.
    “Why indeed . . .” Brian repeated my first question pensively. “Well, there
is a sense of . . .‘let’s see how little I can get by with,’ you know?”
    “So, that’s why you do it?”
    “Yeah, it’s sort of . . .” Brian replied, “let’s see how basic I can make my
life, or, how simple I can make my life and still be happy and comfortable.”
That’s the guiding philosophy, he explained, as he took a small bite off the
tomato-and-cheese toast Susan had just fixed for lunch in their propane-
powered oven. But the word “philosophy” did not seem to suffice. It was
something larger, more complex, and yet simple, he indicated.
    Brian started “simple, real simple.” After he relocated to the Yukon from
Vancouver Island in the early 1980s to work for the government, he settled
into a rough cabin in the forest. A couple of years later he moved to the
shore of Lake Laberge—a widening of the Yukon River surrounded by dry
hills and a half dozen homes. Lake Laberge felt like home. He eventually
met Susan and dedicated himself to raising goats there. Now in his sixties—
though I never asked, that’s what his bushy beard and unkempt silver hair
24                                The Pull of Remove
led me to assume—Brian had been farming for the last 20 years, growing a
few hardy crops and selling cheese at the farmers’ market and at the Alpine
Bakery in Whitehorse. Because of the distance from the nearest access to
the grid, installing all the necessary power poles would have been impossibly
expensive. So they decided to make their own electricity with solar panels.
       There was a gentle quality about Brian that I couldn’t quite grasp as he
spoke. Perhaps it was his warm blue eyes—which never seemed to make eye
contact, always escaping into the distance, seemingly looking for the right
words. Or maybe it was his calm, accepting demeanor, which made me feel
unhurried and welcomed. We were bound to find out soon.
       The lake served as their water supply,viii Brian explained. “We used to haul
water in buckets,” but that method became tiring as he aged, so he upgraded to
an electric pump channeling water through a freeze-resistant soft plastic hose.
The water was collected inside a large tank under the house and then purified
by a UV-ray light system. That was the simple part. The hard part was, and
still is, the Yukon climate. During winter the lake freezes, so Brian needs to
walk on the icy surface, about 100 meters from the beach, to drill a hole. That
is where he inserts the hose, protected by a wooden cover meant to keep snow
away. Depending on the temperatures, which regularly dip as low as –30°C
(–22°F) or –40°C (–40°F), he needs to drill a fresh hole every few days. “But the
shoulder season is really the tough part,” Brian added in his unworried speech
pattern. “You see,” he continued, “that’s when the ice isn’t frozen solid offshore
yet, but it’s frozen at the shore, where the hose is.” A bit of a standoff: too
shallow at the shore to use the pump, and not frozen solid enough offshore to
walk too far. Didn’t this sound like the perfect epitome of a simple way of life?
       But there was another complication. Brian was, and had always been,
entirely blind—we were stunned to learn half way through the interview. A
computer program allowed him to use email, a speaking charge-control dis-
play allowed him to monitor how much energy was stored in the house bat-
teries, and all his other senses allowed him to live the simple life he craved.
The key part of the simple lifestyle, he explained, is that “this is just a lovely
place to live, you’re close to nature, totally quiet, if you want something done,
you just do it yourself.”ix
Voluntary Simplicity?
When Brian and other off-gridders spoke of living a simple life, they
evoked—some explicitly, some without actually naming it—a philosophy
of “voluntary simplicity:” a set of values based on frugality, sustainability,
viii.
ix.
                           The Pull of Remove                                 25
self-sufficiency, and resilience. Voluntary simplicity is not a recent inven-
tion, as it draws from ascetic influences present in Puritanism, Quakerism,
­Confucianism, Jainism, Taoism, Hinduism, Islam, and especially B    ­ uddhism.1
Its diffusion and uptake, however, are quite contemporary. Fueled by cur-
rently en vogue impulses to hamper the reach of consumerism, by the urgency
of reducing dependence on non-renewables, and also by the more bourgeois
desire for “downshifting,” voluntary simplicity has gained many followers in
the last three decades. Its popularity is due in no small part to the writings of
Duane Elgin, who penned the movement’s manifesto in 1981 and followed
it up with three successful spinoff books.
     The “voluntary” part refers to a deliberate act of choice: an awakening
leading to a lifestyle conversion. The awakening consists of gaining the
critical awareness that global society has spun out of control. Its voracious
addiction to consumption and to the resources necessary for the production
and distribution of ostensibly unnecessary goods lies at the basis of what
Elgin calls “involuntary complexity.” Involuntary complexity is a modern
syndrome marked by waste, stress, greed, clutter, pollution, anxiety, lack of
personal control, economic inequality, and social fragmentation. Gaining
critical consciousness of this condition leads to a revelation that the com-
plexity characterizing global capitalism is not a result of freedom and choice.
We are instead “running on automatic,” argues Elgin, and we need to wake
up and “live more consciously.”
     “Simplicity,” the second cornerstone of the lifestyle, refers to a willed
curtailment of the so-called unnecessary complications of everyday life. “To
live with simplicity,” writes Elgin, “is to unburden our lives—to live more
lightly, cleanly, aerodynamically”2 in the ways we work, consume, dwell,
relate, learn, and entertain ourselves. Simplicity is about modesty, but it is
not to be confused with poverty. Poverty is “involuntary simplicity”; it is
not deliberately chosen and it is repressing, hopeless, passive, helpless, and
degrading, whereas simplicity is consciously chosen, liberating, self-empow-
ering, creative, beautiful, and functional.3 Simplicity consists of voluntary
 choices, such as to buy less, consume sustainably and ethically, eat more
 local and natural foods, reduce clutter, recycle and re-use, practice creativ-
 ity, participate in cooperatives, take a more active role in self-education, use
 renewable energy resources, prefer smaller-scale forms of living, and develop
 skills based on the values of self-reliance.
     Elgin’s ideas were gradually adopted by people worldwide, and these
 groups and individuals attracted the attention of many researchers. For
 example, Grigsby4 found that voluntary simplifiers are not only concerned
about the perils of environmental degradation, the vicious logic of con-
sumerism, and the ideology of competitive careerism and its accompany-
ing materialism, but also are preoccupied with the importance of restoring
26                         The Pull of Remove
communitarian values intended to make interpersonal relations and collec-
tive life more equitable and less self-centered. These values also character-
ized the homesteaders examined by Kneale-Gould,5 though she also found
that the self-sufficiency ideals inherent in the back-to-the-land movement
took on an especially spiritual tone in the US. The voluntary simplicity of
homesteaders, she argued, was a response to diffused cultural and personal
problems of meaninglessness. Similarly concerned with the sociological sig-
nificance of voluntary simplicity, Cherrier and Murray6 found that follow-
ers of this social movement underwent a personal identity transformation
focused on bringing significance to an otherwise inauthentic and commodi-
fied existence.
    Many academics portray voluntary simplicity as a rational, instrumental,
calculated choice. For example Leonard-Barton7 viewed it as “the degree to
which an individual selects a lifestyle intended to maximize his/her direct
control over daily activities and to minimize his/her consumption and
dependency [. . .]. This choice is voluntary; this low-consumption and low-
energy lifestyle is often selected by individuals who are financially able to
afford a more luxurious way of living.” The intentionality and voluntarism
present in the literature is especially explicit among those who have stud-
ied the motives, attitudes, and lifestyle satisfaction of voluntary simplifiers.
For instance Etzioni8 found that voluntary simplicity is an expression of
“free will”: “a choice a successful corporate lawyer, not a homeless person,
faces.” For Chhetri and colleagues,9 the self-empowering simplification of
life by “relatively affluent, highly successful, middle-aged people choos-
ing to live a less work-oriented lifestyle” resulted in a broader process of
“downshifting”—a trend typical of a broader exurbanization movement that
allowed people to take more control over their lives. As well, Zavestovski10
and Huneke11 found voluntary simplifiers in the US to live more intrinsi-
cally satisfying, authentic, healthier, mindful lives focused on making ethical
consumption choices. Similar findings and assumptions are echoed in the
social psychological literature on samples from Japan, Western Europe, the
UK, and Australia.12
    The Canadian off-gridders we met were a unique kind of voluntary
simplifier. While they were a diverse group, the tendency among them
was to embrace most of the voluntary simplicity values. Almost all of the
individuals we interviewed, in fact, strove to reduce dependence on non-
renewables and took an intensely active role in practicing smaller-scale
living. Like other voluntary simplifiers, off-gridders generally grew some
food—some even cultivated, raised, hunted, or fished the majority of their
calorie intake. They were often very unconcerned with fashion or the latest
“must-have” product. They were masters at the art of re-using—often uti-
lizing discarded wood products to warm their homes or for their building
                            The Pull of Remove                              27
projects. They were remarkably well educated, combining good doses of
formal education with copious amounts of critical social consciousness,
environmental awareness, and practical know-how. They were also keen
on finding their own sources of entertainment—typically preferring com-
munity gatherings, outdoor pursuits, and face-to-face interaction to televi-
sion programming. And most of them were very concerned about limiting
their carbon footprint. In short, living off-grid was, undoubtedly, a form of
voluntary simplicity.
    However, what exactly was so simple about a lifestyle based on, among
many other daily activities, drilling through ice for water? And were these
lifestyle choices actually voluntary given that—just like Brian—so many
Canadians lived off-grid because of the high costs of hooking up their
homes?
Showering with Grizzlies
Guarded by a scruffy coyote and a disinterested black bear, the road to Bill
and Jenny’s felt like an abandoned roller coaster path: twisted, dangerous,
and manically craggy, all with a distinctly forgotten feel. We reached the
house in the dark, on a chilly evening. Bill and Jenny had been renting their
cabin for a year at the cost of $350 per month. Both quite young and from
Southern Canada, they had recently come up North after getting married.
Bill was tall, slim, and friendly looking. He spoke a mile a minute. Jenny was
calmer—introspective, but warm. We sat down for tea. While Jon endeav-
ored to get the lighting right for the video recording, I spotted Heidegger
and several anthropology texts on the small bookshelf.
    “When we were renting from other landlords it felt like we were making
the rich richer,” Bill explained, “but then we were inspired to try living off-
the-grid. The lifestyle felt adventurous, edgy. But it feels like we’ve become
more philosophical the more we tell the story, as if we’ve found more politi-
cal meaning in it than we set out to,” he reflected. “The lifestyle shaped who
we are now. In the beginning, it was really all about getting ahead and saving
some money.” Setting up an off-grid power system requires a lot of cash up-
front. While it is possible to save money compared to being on-the-grid, the
payoffs can be quite slow. Living off-grid made economic sense in their case
though, as they could rent a place already set up.
    Their home was a small, romantic, cozy, wooden chalet with only one
open-concept room downstairs and a bedroom up the narrow ladder. Pro-
pane fueled a cooking stove and two lights. Three candles provided addi-
tional glow. There was no plumbing so a bucket had to be placed under the
sink to capture dishwater. An outhouse served their bodily needs, though
28                          The Pull of Remove
they typically planned “BMs” for the workplace. There was no TV, tele-
phone, microwave, washing machine, drier, or dishwasher. No refrigerator
either. They used to keep food in a box placed in a hole dug outside, but it
was too easy to forget about it and provisions would often go to waste, so
they recently acquired a cooler. A woodstove warmed the house. They’d get
their wood by Facebooking the wood-delivery guy, as they had, of course,
internet access. No need to sacrifice necessities.
    As they described their day-to-day routines, their portrait of the minor
inconveniences of off-grid life grew humorous, even paradoxical.
    “We once found ourselves turning on the generator to recharge our iPod.
That really made us think of what consuming energy means. We stopped
doing it after that.”
    “We didn’t have a generator at first, so we couldn’t plug in our car during
winter nights. So when the temperatures would fall below –30°C (–22°F)
we’d need to get up in the middle of the night every two hours to start
the car and get the engine running for a few minutes. It was like having a
newborn.”
    “It’s a lot of work to live like this. You need to plan your day very care-
fully,” Jenny observed. “It’d be nice if things were a bit simpler. Everything
needs to be thought-out because we don’t want to drive to town too much.
Like, every day our bag needs to have clean clothes, shampoo, a towel, fresh
underwear because we do our laundry and shower at work,” she said with
a laugh.
    “Yeah, I think my co-workers get annoyed with me sometimes, with how
my work and home boundaries blur,” Bill observed with a mischievous grin,
“the baskets of laundry, the bags of groceries . . .”
    “Groceries?” I wondered.
    “Yeah we can’t leave our groceries in the car because of the mice . . .”
    “Mice?!”
    “They seem to have found a way inside the car. Jenny left her coffee mug
in the car the other day and they went after her mocha.”
    “But you wouldn’t want to leave your groceries in the car anyway, at least
during winter,” Bill continued.
    “Why is that?”
    “Because you’ll buy fresh fish and veggies for dinner and when you take
it out of your trunk it’s all frozen!”
    Bill and Jenny’s routines seemed to muddle the voluntary simplicity
argument even deeper. Our own personal experiences at the cabin further
bedeviled it. Our mornings had to start early to accommodate our busy
interview schedule, but in order to fire up the woodstove we had to set Jon’s
submarine alarm for an even earlier time. Having breakfast in a warm space
                                The Pull of Remove                                 29
was an absolute necessity as morning temperatures were already reaching
–10°C (14°F). Toothbrushing and face-washing were no mindless tasks
either. With no plumbing available we had to collect fresh water from the
cold-as-hell Wheaton.
     Nighttime chores were equally convoluted. Years of camping had pre-
pared us to wash dishes with water warmed up on a propane stove. Camping
had also trained us to appreciate the sense of accomplishment inherent in
starting a fire quickly. But camping on BC’s Southwest Coast hadn’t exactly
raised our—or at least my—tolerance toward grizzlies. Petrified at the pros-
pect of a dark encounter on my way to the gents’, I had resorted to peeing
in a milk jug overnight. None of this was a big deal and the raw beauty of it
all seemed to compensate for everything, but the simplicity argument wasn’t
exactly scoring too many points.
     The longest drive of the week, about two and one-half hours each way,
was reserved for a sunny weekend afternoon. As we sped along the deserted,
permafrost-ridden Alaska/Klondike Highway, a bizarre flash-storm spoiled
an otherwise memorably scenic ride set between stunning boreal forests,
alongside turquoise glacial lakes, and through ample valleys flanked by mas-
sive, snow-capped ridges.x After reaching Haines Junction we turned left
at aptly named . . . junction onto Haines Road. Suddenly the road surface
changed and the asphalt became as level and smooth as a pool table. Resi-
dents of Haines, Alaska, and of the adjacent communities scattered on the
US Chilkat Inlet must drive through Haines Road, and therefore through
the Western Yukon to reach the rest of the state. As a result, the Americans
funded the road’s maintenance and the result was impressive. The electric-
ity grid wasn’t as advanced, however. Even though a hydropower generating
plant was located in the area, its lines whizzed straight to Whitehorse. The
bypass left Haines Road in the dark and angered the local residents, left with
off-grid living as their only option.
     Annette had organized a potluck dinner for our evening visit and invited
a dozen of her neighbors to tell us all about their choice not to live off-grid
on Highway 3. It sounded as if the “voluntary” part of voluntary simplic-
ity was about to get challenged too. “We’re not off-the-grid by choice,
make no mistake about it, we’d all hook up tomorrow if they gave us the
choice,” we were told by a harmonious chorus of angry voices, “without
power there is no economic development; without access to power there
is no democracy.”
     There were about 50 full-time residents scattered near Kluane National
Park, on a stretch of 60 kilometers reaching the Alaska border. Despite
x.
30                                The Pull of Remove
concerted efforts to lobby the territorial government, rural electrification
was still a pipe dream. Like many others around there, Annette and her
husband relied on tourism, and with the increasing costs of diesel for their
backup generator and propane heating they found it impossible to avoid
passing off the costs to their guests. The Kathleen Lake Lodgexi wasn’t
alone. Neighboring businesses and homes had similar systems, which cost
them a monthly average of a thousand bucks on diesel alone. “It’s not bad
enough that the politicians don’t give a damn,” we were told, “but you also
get this attitude from people who have power: ‘well it was your choice to
move there, now suck it up!’”
       The dynamics of that “choice” were very complex. As we devoured gener-
ous helpings of delicious grilled Kathleen Lake trout, Annette and friends
shared their stories of what pulled them here. Their “choices” to relocate
were urged by the irresistible call for a better life. “The Yukon picks its own
people,” someone said, “you come here one day and you’re hooked.” “I felt a
calling to the North, I felt I belonged here,” another voice in the midst of the
disorderly dinner chat cried. Intrigued, when I asked for more explanation
I was simply told to just take a look out of the window.xii Dark, impassable,
almost perfectly triangular slabs of rock exploded out of the greenery into
the sky, reaching 4, 5, and 6,000 meters. At their feet, calmly reflecting their
snowy heights, lay placid waters. The ancient wilderness of Kluane National
Park had an obvious haunting power.xiii It was the kind of place you stum-
bled upon on your quest for Klondike gold and felt compelled to keep as
your own treasure before the rest of civilization would discover it and ruin it.
                                               ***
Over two years of research we met two basic groups of off-gridders. The
first group was comprised of people who moved off-the-grid because they
were determined to generate their own power. They were the rarest. The
second type consisted of people who settled for living off-grid because the
nearest power pole was too distant from the land they had purchased—and
therefore too expensive to connect to. If we can speak of a clear, free-willed
choice for simplicity, we can only do so for the first, small group. For the
greatest majority, instead, living off-grid was a compromise. It was a neces-
sity of sorts that—combined with serendipity, vocation, discovery, reflection,
and acquired taste—was gradually turned into virtue.
       To say that living off-grid was a “necessity” is not the same as saying
that it was a financial necessity. Social scientists are often tempted to argue
xi.
xii.
xiii.
                           The Pull of Remove                                 31
that people’s conduct is explained by financial forces and economic need.
Though money does matter, it would be wrong to suggest that it deter-
mined off-gridders’ actions. Take Brian, for example. The farm he owned
with his wife was off-the-grid because it would have cost too much to install
6 kilometers’ worth of power poles. But Brian didn’t “need” to be off-grid.
He settled into his new place after migrating from elsewhere in search of
a better way of life. He chose to move, but he did not necessarily choose
to live off-grid. So, while the decision to be off-grid was influenced by the
exorbitant cost of connection, the decision to relocate in the first place was
not determined by capital.
   The nature of the “choices” made by the people living along Haines Road
wasn’t terribly different. For the couple of aboriginal individuals at the din-
ner table, living off-grid was a cultural tradition they continued to practice
out of the spirit of attachment to both place and community. For the others,
migration to the area was also explained by the connection with the spirit
of place and by the lifestyle they could practice there. But for neither the
aboriginal nor the Euro-Canadian off-gridders of Haines Road could free
choices or necessities explain why they were off-grid. Clearly theirs was not
an exercise of either “free will”13 or a financial decision. Living off-grid was
voluntary only in the sense that all these individuals had realized they could
live a pleasant life by moving to, or remaining in, a place they felt compelled
to inhabit.
   Finances did play a role in Jenny and Bill’s choice to rent their cabin,
because by living off-grid they saved money. But as renters they were an
exception to the norm—off-gridders are typically homeowners who, most
often, are also involved in the house-building process. Very few Canadian
off-grid homeowners (namely, those for whom the connection cost would
have been truly exorbitant) would argue that living off-grid is a clearly supe-
rior financial option than living on-grid. To boot, the “financial need” argu-
ment had limited purchase even in Bill and Jenny’s case, since saving money
was not the only factor in their decision. They, in fact, also wanted to “live in
a nice place.” So, it would be wrong to explain a move off-the-grid as either
a clear and free “choice” or a strictly monetary “necessity.”
   Our fieldwork in BC and the Yukon had also shown that off-grid living
was not so simple either. Domestic consumer technologies and the modern
assemblages on which these rely have been designed to increase comfort and
convenience, and comfort and convenience are now normal expectations
in the Western world.14 Obviously these assemblages are quite complex in
both their design and operation—well beyond the capacity of the typical
consumer to build or fix, and perhaps to even comprehend. But despite their
mechanical complexity, typical domestic technologies are generally designed
to be easy, if not downright foolproof, to use. Flicking on a switch to light
32                           The Pull of Remove
or warm up a room requires no technical knowledge on the consumer’s
part. On the other hand, living off-grid relies on a deeper involvement. It
demands knowledge about the capacity of one’s energy-generating system,
awareness about the precise extent of one’s needs and wants, an understand-
ing of the architecture and ecology of one’s dwelling,15 and possibly even the
ability to repair things or make them last longer.16
    What appeared to be a voluntary plan, realization, awakening, or deliberate
choice, wasn’t. And, as even our own experiences at the cabin had shown, enjoy-
ing a simple life resulted in several complications and mundane challenges.17
Though still partially useful, the voluntary simplicity thesis had to be seriously
amended if we really wanted to understand why people lived off-the-grid.
In Love with Place
Freed from the habit of vegging out in front of the television, evenings at
our cabin became focused on scrutinizing visual material, making notes, and
sketching out plans. Among other nighttime considerations, we decided
that every province/territory would correspond to a chapter of this book,
and that every province/territory would serve as a case study of a different
aspect of off-grid living. The cases, we felt, would be driven by whatever we’d
stumble upon, as well as the timing of our travel and the most outstand-
ing features of a province/territory. For example, visiting frozen Alberta in
January—our next trip—seemed like the perfect time to study heating and
the importance of domestic warmth. The architecture of this book, almost
entirely as it looks now before your eyes, was outlined under the propane
light illuminating the small dining table of our cabin in the Yukon.
    One of our most debated topics on those nights was simplicity. The
seeming discomforts, sacrifices, and inconveniences of off-grid living were
obvious. The lifestyle was apparently not for everyone. Yet, just about any
off-gridder we met was adamant about the simplicity of it all. “It’s simple!”
“It’s easy!” “Piece of cake!” “What’s the problem?”—we kept hearing. Maybe
the problem was with our own disposition.
    The next morning we got out of bed even earlier and bee-lined it for the
Baked Café, in downtown Whitehorse. As Jon relished his usual Americano
and I my gourmet latte we went online and looked up the meaning of simplic-
ity in the dictionary. One unusual definition jumped out at us. Simple does
not just mean “easy,” we learned. It’s too seductive to equate the two within
the context of a consumer society structured to be consumer-friendly, user-
friendly, hassle-free, and drive-throughable. Simplicity also means “freedom
from guile and pretense” and “genuineness.” That was it. Off-gridders were
telling us that life is not necessarily as complex as it’s made to seem nowadays.
                                  The Pull of Remove                                  33
After all, our species has made it thus far without smart phones, microwaves,
tumble driers, and the seemingly unrelinquishable convenience of so many
domestic technologies. Off-gridders’ point about simplicity was obvious:
“We do not need to build yet another dam or dig up another mountain of
coal to fuel an electrical infrastructure in order to recharge batteries for gad-
gets we can easily do without!” Life does not need to be that complex, and we
need to stop pretending we are unable to take care of it by ourselves.
      All caught up with semantics, email, and caffeine, we parted ways with
the mid-morning office crowd and hit the unpaved road again, this time to
meet Barrett.xiv Growing up in the San Francisco Bay Area, and globetrot-
ting for work by way of Oxford, Prince Edward Island, and other places in
between, Barrett always knew he wanted to be “in the bush.”xv When he
and his Alaska-born wife, Carol, visited their son, who had declared the
Yukon his new home, they “fell in love” with the place and began planning
their quasi-retirement. Standing well over six feet tall, of strong build, and
of confident poise, Barrett needed no Florida-style, condo retirement. “We
had four mutually exclusive criteria,” he recounted while Carol occasion-
ally pitched in off-camera. “We wanted inexpensive acreage, we wanted to
be somewhat near to town and the airport, we wanted some kind of water
frontage, and we wanted to be in the bush—I was feeling claustrophobic
living in a 800-square-foot semi-detached house in an old council neigh-
borhood.” They eventually found their dream lot near a bend of the Yukon
River, only a few minutes away from central Whitehorse.
      There was only one problem; while the grid was almost at gunshot dis-
tance, the lines carried only high-tension power. Building a transformer
substation and installing poles to connect their house would have cost a
quarter of a million. “So you can see how the four variables for moving
here did not include being off-grid,” he explained, “it was never really our
choice.” But Barrett viewed that as a fun challenge, not an obstacle. After
sketching the design of their would-be house and hiring himself as the
general contractor, Barrett installed a wind turbine “out of a kit mailed from
Michigan and a ‘how to build wind mills for dummies’ book.” Solar panels,
a heat sink,xvi and a hot water solar collector soon accompanied it. A diesel
generator was put in place for backup, though Barrett admitted he never
stopped strategizing how to make do without it.
      Stepping into Barrett and Carol’s exquisitely designed 1,900 square-foot
villa, you’d be hard-pressed to tell they are off-grid. “And that’s the idea,”
Barrett remarked with pride as we ate lunch together, “we knew we’d have
xiv.
xv.
xvi.
 34                              The Pull of Remove
guests, and we didn’t want to sacrifice on comfort.” So, there was a microwave
oven in the house—used cautiously—and a propane-powered clothes drier,
which was only employed when uncooperative clouds wouldn’t retreat. On
their deck, graced by the vista of an ocean of trees, they even had a hot tub.
        In spite of the tantalizing Jacuzzi sessions, Barrett and Carol weren’t the “sit-
around-and-do-nothing-all-day” types, though. Barrett, in particular, seemed
to be able to turn every chore into a fun-filled, big-toy-powered activity.
        “You guys wanna go on a ride around the property on the Kubota?”
        “Sure!” What self-respecting off-grid ethnographer could refuse an RTV
ride!?
        The Rough Terrain Vehicle—we learned as we bumped and ground
along his well-maintained trails—was used regularly to pick up firewood
and “fire-smart” the forest. In charge of his own road maintenance, during
the long winter Barrett also carried buckets full of ash to improve traction
for his truck. “Ash gives you the best grip in the world.”
        “You always need to be mindful,” Barrett explained, as there are a lot of
chores. The generator needs filters to be changed. Batteriesxvii occasionally
need to be maintained. Monitorsxviii need to be checked. Wood needs to
 be collected and added to the wood gasification boiler.xix Water must be
 picked up in town, driven home, and emptied into the house tank. And of
 course, sometimes things break. “It’s about an hour a day on average,” he
 found. But it was no big deal. It was all good physical activity that kept him
 from needing to join the gym and from wasting time with lazy pursuits. And
 it was all worth it to be able to live in paradise.
        The 21 off-gridders we met in the Yukon were a diverse bunch. Their
 homes (and businesses) were quite different from one another, and so were
 their motives, skills, resources, and day-to-day ways of living. Compare the
 different comfort of Barrett and Carol’s home with the minimalism of Bill
 and Jenny’s, for example. Yet, interestingly enough, both couples had to deal
 with similar amounts of daily complexities: Barrett and Carol had to look after
 the idiosyncrasies of their large and expensive system, whereas Bill and Jenny,
 on the other hand, had to tackle the challenges of “making do” with whatever
 little they had available. Both of these households faced more complications
 and inconveniences than the average on-grid home and yet they—as well as
 other off-gridders—enjoyed living “simply” because they had managed to
 embrace the challenges that their relative self-reliance demanded.
        “How do you cope with all these inconveniences?” I had asked two
­Lasquetians by the name of Peter and Sue a few months before.
 xvii.
 xviii.
 xix.
                           The Pull of Remove                                 35
    “Cope?” Sue answered authoritatively. “We don’t cope with inconveniences,”
she corrected me as she looked me straight in the eyes. “We embrace challenges.”
    Studying off-gridders’ motives had revealed that life as a whole is not
meant to be easy—whether we live on- or off-grid. Off-gridders’ experi-
ences showed us that power is best understood as the innate ability to do
work,18 not just the stuff that comes out of an outlet. Off-gridders knew that
the assemblages designed to make modern life convenient, comfortable, and
downright easy had resulted in making entire generations dependent, lazy,
scared to fend for themselves, and unaware of the vast amount of resources
we consume and waste.19 “The chaos caused by even the briefest of power
cuts shows just how many institutional interests are involved in the mass
production and industrialization of comfort,” sociologist Elizabeth Shove
has observed, “such events also show how much consumers rely on the
technologies of central heating and cooling and on the utilities that supply
them.”20 Off-gridders’ lifestyle, on the other hand, put them back in touch
with the basic complexities of living. It is through these everyday complexi-
ties that they learned that it is actually quite normal, undaunting, indeed
even expected of a living being to put up with life. “What people take to be
normal is immensely malleable . . . there are no fixed measures of comfort,”
observed Shove21 or, for that matter, of simplicity.
    Though rife with complexities, the off-grid life was not at all unbear-
ably complicated—we were now coming to realize after the initial shock.
It was just something off-gridders had gotten used to—much like we have
all gotten used to operating complex computers and finding it so easy. The
simplicity of off-grid consisted not in foolproof ease but in its minimalist
elegance, in the restraints typical of the lifestyle, in its direct relation with
place, and in its freedom from the modern pretense that human survival
demands distant supplies of resources and expert intervention and authority.
Simplicity was just another word for unpretentiousness.
    But a full amendment to our understanding of “voluntary simplicity” also
required a different understanding of place: a less rational, less calculated,
more affective relation with the places we call home. Going off-grid was a
way for people to separate themselves from the more undesirable aspects
of the world and carve a little safe haven for themselves. It was a way of
removing oneself from uniformity, greed, unsustainability, laziness, pollu-
tion (material and symbolic), irresponsibility, and everything else that cor-
rupts the world. A few years before, I had coined the concept of “remove”
in order to capture this performance of self-distancing.22 Remove, I had
suggested, was a set of practices of a distinct lifestyle that is spatially dis-
connected from, or at least alternatively connected to, a maligned, powerful
counterpart. I had used the idea to describe the lifestyle of exurbanites who
left crowded and noisy cities in search of peace and quiet on small, idyllic
36                         The Pull of Remove
islands. Acts of remove were many different “practical ways in which the
individual handles his or her material surroundings,”23 and the concept held
up well in the off-grid context.
    Rather than a calculated option, remove was experienced by off-gridders
as a “call” or an affective “pull” they had little control over. It was an unex-
plainable attraction toward the idylls of the countryside, the wilderness,24
the “physical quality of the environment,”25 the “wildscapes,” the “adventur-
escapes,” and the “farmscapes”26 of their places. Off-gridders were in love
with place—a love they couldn’t help, and a love that led them to seek a
better way of life wherever the pull of remove came from.
    The pull of idyllic places and the appeal of “the rich intimate ongoing
togetherness of beings and things which make up landscapes and places,
and which bind together nature and culture over time”27 played a crucial
role in explaining why off-gridders removed themselves into their “spaces
of alternate ordering.”28 Indeed, this played even a greater role than political
ideologies like voluntary simplicity did. Rather than instrumentally planned
utopias, off-grid homes and properties could then be better understood as
affective spaces; places with a unique enchanting power of their own.
    The practice of remove was a “tactical” move, a move that altered, dis-
rupted, and re-signified relations with an exterior power without really
changing it.29 By disconnecting from a large utility company, an off-grid
household closed down certain lifestyle possibilities and opened up dif-
ferent ones. By removing themselves from dominant energy assemblages,
off-gridders created a peripheral and alternative space. And there—like
back-to-the-landers,30 smallholders,31 permaculturists,32 and politically
radical self-sufficient farming groups33—they enacted a version of place
based on the value and practice of hard work,34 family and community time,
environmental sustainability, skillfulness, the pursuit of physical and moral
health, and the romantic mystique of wilderness and nature.
    Through their remove, they actively performed a symbolic and mate-
rial distance from urban consumerism, similar to the widespread trend of
counter-urbanization.35 By practicing remove they also performed a radical
rurality that challenged the logic of dependence on light, speed, and power
and that aimed to develop an alternative lifeworld less based on ephemer-
ality, careerism, and disposability.36 An alternative lifeworld less keen on
struggling to overtake power and more interested in reassembling it on a
local scale in the way it was generated, distributed, and used.37
    Our search for answers as to why people lived off-the-grid had, in sum,
yielded the impression that off-grid living was a modest and unpretentious
form of removal from the societal drive toward assimilation into large-scale
networks. Off-gridders’ quest for de-centralization and self-reliance—
though admittedly never complete and at times even contradictory—stood
                               The Pull of Remove                                           37
as a contestation against large-scale development, the fetishism of economic
growth, distant supply mechanisms, and reliance on professional expertise.
    This quest characterized the off-grid lifeworld not as a utopian, separate
space of political transformation, but rather as an alternatively connected,
relational space. Individuals’ motives, we had come to believe, revealed
strongly held convictions but also hopes, failures, aspirations, pleasures,
complexities, irrational drives, impulses, struggles, ironies, disillusions, com-
promises, and the negotiations typical of any lifestyle quest.


3 Involvement

Wood and the City
The thermometer read a stunning 9°C (48°F) when we reached Edmonton.
The locals looked beside themselves on the busy streets: jogging, walking
cats and dogs, reading on park benches, playing (field) hockey, and hav-
ing a jolly old time. It was January but it felt like spring break. Edmonton
is one of North America’s northernmost and coldest cities. Its chilliest
month is January, ­during which its average daily temperature is a brisk
–11.7°C (11°F). Its record low, also established in January (back in 1886),
is a ­traffic-stopping –48.3°C (–56.9°F). To make matters worse, Alberta’s
capital is very windy. There are winter days when Edmonton is colder than
Moscow, the planet Mars, and even Winnipeg. But in spite of the heat wave
we decided we would stick to our plan to study heating. While the weather
wasn’t the most propitious, Alberta still retained its status as Canada’s most
­natural-gas-dependent province and, it goes without saying, the world’s
 most controversial oil producer due to its resource-intensive obsession
 with bitumen extraction. Alberta, in other words, was the place to research
 ­off-gridders’ reliance on fire.
      Our interest in domestic warmth was apropos for another reason: a
few Google searches had revealed that Edmonton was home to one of the
  ­liveliest Net Zero urban scenes on the continent. Net Zero building is a type
   of design characterized by an equal balance between the energy consumed
   and the energy generated on-site by a home. Because of Alberta’s reliance on
                                        39
40                                     Involvement
coal for electricity generation and natural gas for domestic ­heating, any form
of involvement in independent renewable energy g­ eneration—even a partial
one—could have a very meaningful effect on the local carbon ­footprint. So,
while Net Zero is not synonymous with off-grid, Jon and I had made plans
to begin our trip by visiting three such residences in the city.
     Conrad’s recently re-designed heritage home, for instance, was still con-
nected to the electricity grid but was off the natural gas network. More nota-
bly, his home faced the back alley: due south. This was a seemingly small
detail, but one whose importance cannot be emphasized enough. Urban and
suburban single-detached houses are typically designed to front the street,
regardless of whether the building ends up facing east, west, south, or north.
Our houses are oriented to the street because we want them to look their
best for the Joneses, but by aiming them the wrong way (as essentially three
fourths of them are) energy conservation ends up taking a backseat to curb
appeal.
     Not only did Conrad’s home look south, but angled in that direction were
also 32 solar panels and a solar hot-water collector that produced almost
as much electricity as Conrad, his wife, and two kids needed to light up
and power their home.ii The panels, functioning as movable awnings, also
provided cool shade during the short but warm summer season, thus cir-
cumventing the need for air conditioning. True, Conrad and family weren’t
off-the-grid, but by utilizing grid electricity mostly as a “plan B” for stretches
of dark days, they treated the grid like a genuine off-gridder would use a
backup gasoline generator. The difference was only nominal. And given the
fact that their home sold excess renewable energy back to the dirty grid,
some might even argue that in the end the advantage was theirs.
     Unintelligent orientation isn’t the only energy-efficiency fault of most
typical homes. Poor wall insulation, large leaky windows, glass on all
sides, tall building towers casting cold shadows on one another, and many
more design and construction obstacles get in the way of saving energy.
In contrast, Conrad’s double-wall system—comprised of two 2 × 4 walls
16 inches apart, one inside the other, with studs on 24-inch centers—had
a true R value of 56. This meant that only about a quarter of the heat
that escapes typical homes actually snuck out of this one. Triple-pane,
fiberglass frame windows contributed to that goal too—with south-facing
windows achieving a compromise between allowing heat in and trapping
it, and east- and west-facing windows focusing squarely on preventing
heat from oozing out.
     Young, highly educated, motivated by voluntary simplicity, and driven by
a deep concern for the environment, Conrad and his wife didn’t own a car.
ii.
                                    Involvement                              41
They relied instead on a bicycle trailer to carry goods home, such as fire-
wood for their woodstove—strategically scavenged from construction sites’
discarded lumber. Besides growing vegetables in the back of their beautiful
home in the historic heart of Edmonton, Conrad and his wife gardened on
several plots throughout the city, including a community garden site and a
friend’s backyard. They both worked part-time to accommodate the extra
domestic labor their lifestyle demanded and also to make time for home-
schooling their two children.
      Conrad may not have been as disconnected from the grid as others, but
all emissions considered, as an urban resident he had a key advantage over
his rural counterparts. “I can walk or bike to work or to most of the stores
where I need to shop, and I can take public transit to reach mostly every-
thing else,” he explained, “whereas in the country you need to get in your car
every time you need to go somewhere.” He scored a great point, I realized,
nodding pensively as the living room woodstove competed silently with the
morning sun to warm us up.
      Passive solar design, along with burning firewood, allowed Conrad and
his wife to minimize the use of their electrical baseboards, whose heat con-
stituted only about 10% of the house’s warmth making. Their thermostats
were turned as far down as you can go, “though there is no zero,” Conrad
remarked, “the lowest you can go on thermostats is seven, but when it’s –30°C
(–22°F) outside we turn them on in the kids’ room up to 12°C (53.6°F).”
Burning firewood in the city isn’t always the easiest thing. Fireiii warms up
an urban dwelling the same as it does a rural one, of course, but municipal
bylaws can curb smoke emission; some ban woodstoves outright for new
home construction or limit their use on days when other anti-pollution
measures are stringently enforced due to inclement weather.
      Like smoke, heat is often a type of waste. Machines of all kinds—from
laptops to automobiles—produce unwanted heat as a by-product of their
operation. While it is a natural process—indeed even human bodies gener-
ate it as part of physical exertion—waste heat is a quintessentially symbolic
expression of late-modern, climate-change-inducing industrialism. Though
we like to tell ourselves we live in a post-industrial service and knowledge
economy, smoke isn’t hard to find. In Edmonton, if you follow the North
Saskatchewan River east through the city center you will eventually find
compelling visual evidence of this. Near West Sherwood Park, in an area
locally known as Refinery Row, gargantuan smokestacks towering over oil
refineries belch out puffy, gray plumes of waste heat. Neither oil nor coal
converts perfectly to energy. The burning of coal to generate electricity, for
example, results in 50% to 65% waste heat.
iii.
42                                    Involvement
     Passive solar design,iv on the other hand, concentrates on not wasting
anything. The design is intuitive. It all begins by allowing the sun to pen-
etrate large south-facing windows. Most, if not all, of the more frequently
inhabited rooms should be designed to face south in order to benefit from
this source of free and renewable heat. Ideally, south-facing glass should
range from 12% to 18% of the total square footage of a house, whereas
west-, east-, and north-facing window surfaces should collectively amount
to no more than 6%. Efficient insulation should then keep warm air inside
and not let it go to waste. Thermal mass, like concrete floors, can absorb heat
during the day and release it slowly at night.
     Besides the sun, inhabitants of regions situated far from the tropics have
throughout the millennia made use of many different resources and tools
to keep warm. Fire has often been at the center of these. Fires have warmed
people in their homes and have gathered families and communities together
in large communal spaces, allowing us to focus on domestic, celebratory, and
work-related tasks. Indeed, no history of our species and its evolution can be
told without attention to fire. The importance of keeping the fire burning
is even reflected in many symbolic traditions, from the ongoing cultiva-
tion of the ever-lasting Olympic flame to the mythological idolization of
Prometheus—who stole the gift of fire from Zeus and gave it to the mortals.
     Fire has always been a troublesome companion, however, for its history is
also the history of resource depletion.1 Firewood was free for all in England,
for example, only until the eighth century. Restrictions began shortly there-
after and records show that a handful of Berkshire villages were fined as
early as the twelfth century for excessive logging.2 Lumber was also a valu-
able building material, of course, and early in its modern history England
began to witness significant deforestation. It was in light of such trends that
coal eventually became a valuable alternative to wood.
     The burning of coal, however, even more than wood, caused noxious
smoke. Coal had been known to humankind since 371 BCE, though burn-
ing it within homes had in later years been subject to several bans. But as
firewood became less available, cities had to give in and allow coal burning
for both domestic and industrial purposes. In order to live with less smoke,
people would hire the services of smokehouses and cookhouses for prepar-
ing their meals. The popularity of pubs—short for public houses—also
grew in part because of the need to keep cooking-emitted smoke away
from the home. But it was of little use. Air quality grew so poor in London
that the city eventually became known as “the Big Smoke.” The air was so
bad that for many years burning coal while Parliament was in session was
forbidden.
iv.
                                Involvement                                  43
    In the meantime, technologies were gradually improving. Open fires—
such as coal crates, braziers, and fireplaces—have always allowed for ease in
cooking and are rewarding to stare at, but it was not until the fire was fully
enclosed within masonry or cast-iron stoves that smoke was effectively dealt
with. A series of improvements to the hearth succeeded one another until
in 1624 Louis Savot reduced the size of the flue above the hearth and the
size of the hearth itself. He also fixed iron plates behind and at the sides of
the hearth. This created ducts through which warmed air was directed back
into the room, heated by way of convection.
    A crucial invention in the progress toward domestic smoke control was
the invention of the catalytic converter. Catalytic converters increase the effi-
ciency of wood burning by 10% to 25%, thus increasing the heat you get from
wood and reducing the need to use more. They also reduce dangerous creosote
buildup in the chimney by 80%.3 They work through the use of a ceramic
honeycomb structure coated by a catalyst placed atop the fire. The catalyst,
palladium or platinum, completes the combustion of unburned hydrocarbons.
    As wood gave way to abundant coal, coal eventually gave way to the
popularity of gas. Gas cookstoves began to appear in the 1850s, and in 1854
The Sunday Times boldly forecast the end of smoky chimneys. But it was
not until the following year that Baron Bunsen, applying previously known
principles of radiation, improved domestic gas heating by creating small
punctures in gas tubes, which drew air in to mix with gas, thus allowing
it to burn hotter.4 Whereas coal had to be carried in horse-drawn vehicles
and hand-delivered to homes, gas could circulate unobtrusively through
mains laid underground. Vast networks of urban gas mains were thus laid
out throughout the early twentieth century.
    Electric heating came onto the scene only later, due to its early high costs.
Even today electric heating is quite pricey in some regions, though as fewer
and fewer people employ oil furnaces due to rising costs, electric heating
continues to gain favor. Though it would seem logical to use electric heat-
ing to warm an off-grid home—Canadian off-gridders unanimously utilize
wood—with a small minority employing propane as well. It simply takes
too much electricity to fire up baseboards or even to operate the air pumps
required by geothermal systems.
    Wood is not a common heating resource across the general Canadian
population, though it is traditionally used in rural areas where it is within
easy reach and often even free.5 Oil burning is also becoming less common.
Statistics show that whereas oil was used by 60% of the population in the
1960s, it is now utilized by only 15% of Canadians—still twice as many as
those who use wood. About a third of Canadians use electricity for heat-
ing, whereas natural gas is employed by about one of every two households.
These figures, however, obscure sharply different regional realities.
 44                                   Involvement
      No statistics on the employment of passive solar are available. Though
you might think that a cold country like Canada would have little to gain
from the use of passive solar, many of the most densely populated areas of
the country receive enough sunshine to warrant serious investments in that
design. Even cold cities like Edmonton and Calgary manage to soak up
between eight and twelve daily mega joules per square meter on an average
autumn day—a fact that somehow made our disappointingly balmy stay in
Alberta seem more acceptable.
Affect and Ways of Heating
“What happens when you apply heat and cold to a Peltier junction?”
      Long pause. Silence. You could practically hear the crickets chirping.
      “Come on guys, haven’t you ever heard of a Peltier junction?!” Donv
­prodded Jon and me for an answer. It was useless. I bombed high school
 physics. And I underachieved even more shamelessly at shop. I recall my
 shop teacher pleading with my parents to keep me away from any job that
 would require me to use my hands.
      “Well, you get electricity!” Don answered, giving up on the both of us.
      “I did well in social studies,” I replied to save face.
      “I concentrated on the visual arts,” Jonathan added with a smirk from
 behind his camera.
      Unimpressed, Don soldiered on to explain how a simple (sort of ) physics
 principle, a 24 × 24-inch Peltier junction, wood heat, and a s­ elf-assembled
 geothermal cold-water pump might eventually allow him and his wife
 Maxine to generate enough electricity to supplement their wind turbine
 and photovoltaic system.
      Don and Maxine lived at the end of the power lines, down an unpaved
 country lane in Alberta’s open sky country. They had camped for years at this
 site, while gradually building their dream energy-efficient home one piece at
 a time. To make heat, Don and Maxinevi collected a yearly average of four
 and a quarter cords (a cord is a wood stack four feet deep by four feet high
 and eight feet long) of pine beetle-killed timber from their 320-acre Peace
 River region property. The climate change-thankful beetle made it easy for
 them to cull trees, but the firewood still had to be chopped onsite in the bush,
 transported, cut, brought indoors, lit, and looked after with TLC to maintain
 a constant ambient temperature. “It’s not a lot of work,” Don demurred, but it
 certainly required a greater deal of effort than flicking on a switch.
 v.
 vi.
                                       Involvement                                  45
       Wood heat is notoriously temperamental, flaring up in bursts of tropi-
cal temperatures soon after lighting and causing indoor temps to plummet
soon after the fire goes out. To discipline it—as good teachers like Don and
Maxine used to be—they applied basic scientific principles. A collection of
5,300 gallons of watervii had been stacked in the crawl space in motley piles
of carefully sealed containers of different shapes and sizes. The containers
didn’t come from the local hardware store. Formerly used for soap, wax,
laundry detergent, and soy sauce, they had been methodically scavenged by
Don and Maxine from schools, restaurants, hotels, and recycling depots over
a 15-year period. Heated during winter by a woodstove and during autumn
and spring by warm air fanned down the solar collector by their old Datsun
car heater-blower, the water worked as thermal mass. It absorbed and radi-
ated heat slowly and thus reduced the need for additional wood burning and
stabilized temperatures upstairs.
       It was only one of myriad inventions and ingenious applications we
found in Don and Maxine’s home that morning. Among them we noted a
briefcase-shaped portable solar panel designed to fulfill electricity needs on
the go, and a wind turbine assembled from oil barrelsviii sawed in halves—
making it look like it belonged on a foreign planet to assist some kind of
NASA mission.
       Awestruck by Don and Maxine’s display of resourcefulness and creativity,
we thought it would be nice to share their inventions with a larger audience,
such as that of Canadian Geographic.ix This type of collaborative magazine
writing—collaborative6 because our work needed to be checked and corrected
by detail-oriented teachers like Don and Maxine—wasn’t the only way in
which the ethnography became more public as time went on. As we arrived in
Calgary a few days later, we learned that a journalist from the Herald wanted
to speak with us. A brief phone interview yielded a newspaper article that
opened the floodgates to nationwide media coverage. By the time we left St.
John’s, Newfoundland, two years later, we had accumulated over 30 newspaper
appearances and two dozen radio interviews, in addition to the many magazine
articles and Huff ington Postx blog pieces we were creating on our own.
       Most of the media calls were fielded while we were on the road. That was
the most likely place we’d be found, given how the long distances and our
busy schedule in provinces like Alberta meant that being on the road (or in
mid-air) occupied most of our time. Highway 43xi northwest of Edmonton
vii.
viii.
ix.
x.
xi.
46                                  Involvement
was one of those endless stretches of driving that connected the pieces of our
over-ambitious interview itinerary. When we finally arrived at our destina-
tion we learned that Terry was in town running errands, but she had kindly
left much-needed coffee and a fresh batch of cookies to keep us focused as
we talked and walked with Lorne.
      Lorne and Terry had lived off-grid since 1980. They could have hooked
up to both electricity and natural gas, as their 160-acre property laid no
more than a slingshot’s range from the two grids, but they chose not to.
Lorne explained he grew up with the dream of the cabin lifestyle, removed
from the hustle and bustle of the city, valuing freedom and independence.
All but the hermit cabin type he struck me as a very gentle and entrepre-
neurial soul. Sixty years young, he operated a busy home-based business
that kept him connected with many people. He spoke of discovering and
utilizing photovoltaic energy, well before most people had ever heard of it,
with a grateful sense of enchantment, as if it was a gift he’d be silly to refuse.
      We sat around the table to visit while the sun charged the array of solar
panels right outside the kitchen window. As I looked away for a moment,
furtively licking my fingers from the last cookie, I noticed the presence of
a cat sleeping on the floor. The air inside the 1,300-square-foot house was
comfortably warm and the furry friend’s location clued me in on the hearth’s
location. Lorne confided that this particular corner was in fact both his
and the feline’s favorite. Warm air released by the burning of carbon stored
within wood circulated in loops inside the cookstove, warming the cook-
ing surface and the air around it. A water jacket wrapped around the flue
provided hot water too. There was also another source of heat in the living
room, a glass-covered woodstove whose fire they would blissfully light up
and watchxii on cold nights.
      Lorne collected wood from his forest. Once his poplar trees would
reach the age of 40 or 50 they would die, often still standing up. He would
then cut them with his chainsaw and bring them down to size with his
hydraulic wood splitter. Other times he would collect fallen trees, either
poplar or birch. In Alberta’s climate, death cures trees, drying them out
of water and sap and allowing them to burn faster, emitting less smoke.
During a typical year Terry and Lorne would consume four or five cords.
He’d go out and split wood every second week or so, for a couple of hours
on a sunny day.
      Terry’s delicious cookie recipe called for flour, eggs, sugar, and . . . two
pieces of birch. Birch was essential to cook with, allowing for the right
heat. Birch burned hotter and longer than poplar, Lorne explained, “It’s
got a nicer aroma too. . . . Poplar is better for spring and summer because
xii.
                                     Involvement                               47
it makes a fast fire” and burns itself out quickly. That’s a good thing
when you don’t want cooking to turn your house into a sweat lodge. Just
like cooking is an art, so is warming up a house. “You get a feel for it,”
he reflected, “you can almost feel when it’s time to add another piece of
wood to the fire to keep it going.” It was –4°C (25°F) outside (I did say it
was a heat wave, but this was still northern Alberta after all) and Lorne
decided to act on his instinct and throw in another piece. “Wood heat
feels different,xiii doesn’t it?” he commented. I agreed, and indulged in
another birchy treat.
                                            ***
       Unlike fish, frogs, and reptiles, human beings are warm-blooded ani-
mals hardly tolerant of dramatic temperature changes. Our bodies tolerate
internal variations of no more than 3°C (ca. 6°F) and consequently our pre-
ferred home temperatures range within a narrow span. Thermoception is the
sense through which we perceive temperature. Despite being recognized as
a sense by well-established biological standards, thermoception is not con-
sidered one of the common “five senses.”
       A few culturally informed studies have helped shed light on how the
temperature sensorium works. For instance, in a recent ethnographic study
conducted within a Chicago public housing project, Fennell7 found that
central-heating policies were tied with political and economic power, class,
and race dynamics. Access to warmth, in other words, was not an equalitar-
ian or democratic process, and the perception of what constituted a suffi-
ciently warm indoor environment was just as complicated by many variables.
And in New Zealand, Cupples and associates8 found that indoor heating
was intertwined with national identities and hegemonic notions of mascu-
linity as well. Therefore, bearing the cold there would often become a test
of gender identity and bodily and moral fortitude. These are just a couple of
examples—many other cultural and social factors like these mediate sensory
experiences worldwide and show that thermoception is no neutral physi-
ological affair.
       Everyday experiences and practices of warmth are just as varied. We’ve
all known people who always seem to be feeling cold, as well as others for
whom no number of open windows will suffice. We’ve also all experienced
cold days that feel warmer than what the thermometer says, or mild days
that feel colder because of wetness or wind. Similarly, we know that dif-
ferent technologies warm us up in different ways. Thermoception is both
the medium through which these experiences are possible, and the means
xiii.
 48                               Involvement
through which these activities unfold. No study of the experience and prac-
tice of heating can unfold without a deeper understanding of how thermo-
ception works.
    Temperature perception unfolds through the work of thermoreceptors:
receptive elements of sensory neurons that register states and changes in
temperature. But thermoception is also about bodily movement and physi-
cal action, as its operation inevitably implies active regulation and manip-
ulation of temperature. A body’s thermal register is in fact not a passive
recorder of conditions already laid out, but a productive interface immersed
in the world’s constant transformation of itself.9 Sociologist Bruno Latour
explains this idea in simple and elegant terms when he writes that the
body as a whole “is not a provisional residence of something superior—an
immortal soul, the universal, or thought—but what leaves a dynamic trajec-
tory by which we learn to register and become sensitive to what the world
is made of.”10
    If we understand thermoception as an interface, and therefore as a skill, a
hub of activities, a sensibility, and an orientation to modulate the world, then
we essentially treat thermoception as a type of affect. Affect is a bodily pull
and a push. Affect is the body’s capacity to be moved and be affected, and
the body’s capacity to move and affect other people and other things. Affect
is “a transpersonal capacity which a body has to be affected (through an
affection) and to affect (as the result of modifications).”11 Thermoception,
 therefore, is not like a thermometer. It is instead an atmospheric attun-
 ement12: an affective force that manifests itself in corporeal involvement in
warmth and in the transformation of living environments.
    Warmth, heat, thermoception—these are all nouns. But from the perspec-
tive of habitation there are no nouns in the typical sense, because things are
their relations, their doings, and their movements—with each noun actually
describing something that is going on.13 Warmth making and heating are
the doings of sun and fire as well as the mediated and relational doings of
sun-collecting and fire-making inhabitants of the planet. Thus, a fire burns
not only by the flickering of its flame and the swirling of its smoke, but also
by the warmth making of the body.14
    Individual and collective expectations for thermal comfort and con-
venience play a crucial role in warmth making. Heating with wood, for
­example—even after the successive introduction of cleaner, more efficient,
 and less physically demanding technologies—is more l­ abor intensive and
 therefore less convenient than other common options. Comfort and con-
 venience are key factors in many domestic technology choices because
 of an ongoing escalation in consumer demand for comfort and conve-
 nience.15 This is part of a broader historical tendency toward perceiving
                               Involvement                                   49
comfort and convenience as a right belonging to all and not just a privi-
lege of the few.16 Such normalization of comfort often leads people to
forget that indoor thermal conditions are the result of the operation of
complex infrastructures, as well as socio-cultural processes of standard-
ization of sensory experiences, needs, and expectations. These “needs have
been defined and reproduced in an incredibly precise manner,” according
to Shove, “and in a manner that takes no account of the historical vari-
ability of indoor climates or the range of conditions in which people of
different cultures say they are comfortable.”17 Indoor thermal seasonal
variation, thus, increasingly seems a thing of the past and the social cycles
and individual skills associated with securing thermal comfort become
subject to oblivion.18
    Thermoceptive capacity varies along with such changing expecta-
tions, standards, and habits, but also in terms of the skills, techniques,
and materials involved in the experience and practice of warmth making.
These variations consist of what we might call ways of heating. Ways of
heating are common parts of our ways of life. They are profoundly social
activities in their rhythms, inflections, and propensities, weaving together
different relations between humans, resources, and technologies. Ways of
heating are individual and collective thermal pursuits and accomplish-
ments shaped by environments, habits, dispositions, and even individual
idiosyncrasies.
    Off-gridders’ bodies have the same thermoceptive potential as the rest
of us, obviously, but our fieldwork showed that they practiced different
ways of heating than most of us do. Their thermoception, in other words,
took place (and made place) differently. For example, collecting wood
required a good deal of physical activity. Designing a home to benefit from
passive solar energy demanded careful foresight. Living in synchrony with
diurnal and seasonal solar patterns necessitated planning and forbearance.
Maximizing the potential of thermal mass called for abstract knowledge
and careful application of principles from material science. Relying on
renewables and reducing the use of non-renewable resources demanded
that off-gridders relinquish some conveniences. In short, if energy—as
its etymology tells us—is the capacity to do work, then off-grid ways of
heating required the actualization of great intensities of the capacity to do
domestic work.
    Through the perspective of habitation, we were able to understand
off-grid ways of heating as something that arose within the currents of
their “involved activity, in the specific relational contexts of their practical
engagement with their surroundings.”19 Through practical engagement with
renewable (and non-renewable) resources and technologies, off-gridders
50                                    Involvement
generated heat in the process of working with the materials available to
them, bringing warmth into being through their abilities to remain atten-
tive, improvise solutions, assess failures, and exercise creativity.
                                              ***
      If you don’t like the weather in Alberta, just wait five minutes.Temperatures
outside had suddenly plummeted to −25°C (−13°F), while our bedroom at
the Red Deer Holiday Inn roasted at an equally uncomfortable 22°C (72°F).
I’d have loved to get the thermostat to dip even a single notch below 18.5°C
(65°F), but neither it nor the unopenable window would accommodate my
preference for a chilly sleeping environment. Unable to sleep in this carpet-
and-pillow-rich version of the Gobi Desert, I resorted to swimming a few
laps in the heated indoor pool downstairs to tire my body just enough for
the night. The total carbon footprint of our stay was appalling.
      Dinner, at least, had been very sustainable: homemade vegetable lasagna
prepared with mostly locally grown ingredients and a zesty carrot salad on
the side, courtesy of Lynnxiv and Mike. Lynn and Mike not only gathered
their vegetables and chicken eggs from their premises, but also collected
wood from neighboring properties. It is not unusual for people to cut down
trees to make space for something else and then leave the trees to rot on the
ground. Lynn and Mike would simply go around the area and recycle what
otherwise would go to waste.
      But wood was only one component of their heating plan. Whereas
dwellings like the Red Deer Holiday Inn got their warmth from sup-
plies of natural gas and then routinely wasted it to allow for breathtaking
north-facing views of the Queen Elizabeth Highway, the key to Lynn and
Mike’s warmth could be found in the ground underneath their feet and in
the walls around them. Lynn used a picture-filled storyboard to tell their
design story.
      Their house was a small, gray monolithic dome.xv It sat near the top
of a gently rising, barren hill decorated by sparse snow blotches reflect-
ing the dim, setting sun. Under the house floor were 1,800 cinder blocks
lying on their sides with their cavities lined up north to south. Sunshine
came in through the south-facing windows and heated the concrete floor.
R-60 (measured loss at −30°C or −22°F was two watts per square foot)
insulated walls with three inches of foam insulation on the outside, and
six inches of reinforced concrete, prevented heat from escaping outside. At
xiv.
xv.
                                    Involvement                                     51
night, thermo-shutters (R-20) were shut to seal windows and doors from
the inside.
      The semi-spherical shape of their monolithic dome gave them a minimal
surface area to heat. As we walked in a clockwise circle around the dome,
realizing how pervasive 90° angles are in ordinary homes and how meticu-
lous dome dwellers needed to be in smoothing out their dominance, we
noticed how evenly warm air circulatedxvi around the monolithic structure.
Re-orienting one’s house and changing its surfaces were certainly different
ways of heating I was aware of, but re-inventing its very shape was . . . well,
very cool.
Hot and Cool Energies
Upon my return home from Alberta I noticed that my mail had quickly
stacked up. Amidst credit card bills, advertising leaflets, and newspapers, one
item in particular stood out: my BC Hydro bill. As I read it in greater detail
than usual, I thought it was odd that I had no clue where the electrons that
warmed up my house at a constant 18°C (65°F) came from. Maybe it was a
dam somewhere in the coastal region, or maybe up in the north of BC. I was
utterly unaware of, and uninvolved with, my way of heating my house. This
was in such contrast to how well Mike, Lynn, Conrad, and the other Alberta
off-gridders knew so well where to find wood, how to cut it, and how to
keep its warmth inside their homes. Without exaggerating the differences
between the two ways of heating, I wanted to refer to them with two dif-
ferent concepts. One way to quickly characterize off-grid ways of heating
and the intensities of involvement they required might be, I thought, to call
them hot energies. Their on-grid counterparts could instead be known as
cool energies.
      Hot energy and cool energy have nothing to do with how warm it is. Hot
and cool here are adjectives describing intensities of personal involvement—
that is: how corporeally engaged a person is in the making of d               ­ omestic
heat. Off-gridders appeared to be more involved than on-gridders like me
because their heating assemblages were quite demanding. Off-gridders’
hot energy heavily depended on a process of education of their attention.20
Throughout this process, their sense of thermoception became “attuned” to
the atmosphere of their homes21: becoming more sensitive to the chang-
ing temperatures of their domestic surroundings; more aware of their tech-
nologies, local climate and weather, locally available resources, and broader
global environmental forces; and more sensitive toward their specific needs
xvi.
52                             Involvement
and preferences. This process showed that off-grid thermoception is a hub
of activities:22 a lively nexus of interrelated practices through which off-
gridders became deeply involved in generating warmth throughout their
homes with the intervention of their heating technologies.
   Warmth stirs our bodies: moving, comforting, and sheltering all of us.
A fire’s flame may even dazzle and enchant us at times. These are expres-
sions of warmth’s vital capacity: its capacity to enable (or in its absence
impede) our everyday life; its ability “to make a difference, produce effects,
alter the course of events.”23 It is easy to forget that a non-human agent
like warmth has this capacity when its generation ceases to be a mundane
concern. Most of our workplaces, shops, and homes are kept so evenly
warm that warmth invariably loses much of its actual affective intensity,
receding in the background of our consciousness. Living off-grid resulted
in a reversal of this tendency: off-grid warmth was a dramatically vibrant
matter that fully retained its enchantment, calling for care, attentiveness,
and respect.24
   Insulation, thermo-mass, and the efficient windows and woodstoves
I had seen in Alberta were interveners in these processes: elements of a
heating assemblage that made a crucial difference in virtue of their posi-
tioning, working as the decisive force catalyzing warmth as an accom-
plishment and an event.25 Thick walls, cement floors, windowpanes, and
the foamy stuff inside walls were hardly spectacular to look at. And yet
these interveners mattered because they operated as intended, enabling
bodily involvement to achieve its transformative potential. They drew
sunshine, collected warm air, held it within, and released it at the right
time. Together they were a “shifting assemblage of practices and practical
knowledges” that gave off-grid ways of heating “the quality of a continual
motion of relations, scenes, contingencies, and emergences.”26 They were
just quiet things that worked—most of the time at least. They were ordi-
nary affects27 that, through their unique flows, gave off-grid hot energies
their unique forms.
   Our body’s thermoceptive power has the capacity to affect us and—not
unlike a catalytic converter—the capacity to affect and transform the tem-
perature of the air we inhabit. Geographer Nigel Thrift28 has explained that
affect is somewhat like the networks of pipes and cables that provide the
basic conveniences and comforts of everyday life. Well, of on-grid life, at
least. Intensities of comfort and convenience worked differently when a
body was disconnected from those networks, without access to pipes and
cables. Hot energies required a different “artful use of a vast sensorium of
bodily resources,”29 or, in short: a greater bodily involvement. Hot energies
demanded a re-engineering of affect: a “skillful comportment”30 through
                               Involvement                                    53
which off-gridders became intensely sensitive to changing thermal dynam-
ics and intensely involved in manipulating their homes through their ways
of heating.
   Every home, like other types of buildings, affects its inhabitants. Yet, dif-
ferent architectural designs operate in different ways to “channel, preclude,
and evoke particular affects.”31 Ordinary, on-grid homes, for example, are
often intended to create a feeling of relative separation from nature, relegat-
ing it to the alienated and foreign outside.32 Off-grid homes instead were
designed to maximize participation within natural processes—such as solar
radiation and its absorption and release—pulling the outdoors indoors and
pushing the inside outside. This relation was not marked by separation from
the surrounding environment but by architectural involvement: an ensemble
of building and everyday domestic activities unfolding in contiguous rela-
tion to other ecological processes.
   Off-gridders’ involvement was a form of habitation intended not as
occupation of, but as connection with, place: an emergent participatory
openness to multiple goings-on. Off-grid homes were characterized by
involvement because their inhabitants’ hot energies were immersions in
the world’s own ways of heating, ongoing acts of adaptive participation
“in the currents of a world-in-formation.”33 Involvement, like affect, is a
noun, but it is a noun that captures a swirl of activities, a hub of move-
ments and sensations. To be involved, to involve, to be affected, to affect,
are verbs: bindings of people and of non-human inhabitants of the life-
world through which substances, intelligences, feelings, and intensities are
wrought together.
   Involvement had a key transformative property in off-grid spaces: it was
catalytic. Catalysis is a chemical process: an increase in the rate of a chemi-
cal reaction provoked by the participation of a catalyst within the process. A
catalyst does not “burn out” after one single act of participation; it retains its
capacity to affect the process again and again. A catalyst is something that
has ongoing transformative power on an assemblage within which it oper-
ates. A catalyst works as an intervener with the capacity to affect a process
by either increasing or decreasing its intensity. Passive solar technologies
were an obvious example of how catalysts could work, by either inhibiting
the escape of warm air from the interior of a house (through insulation) or
by augmenting a building’s exposure to solar radiation through appropriate
positioning and warmth capture.
   By attending to Albertan off-gridders’ domestic “spaces of practice,”34 we
also realized something very important about the broader off-grid quest for
a better way of life. Whereas we on-grid dwellers have become very much
uninvolved in the process of making warmth within our homes, off-gridders’
54                                   Involvement
involvement in the heating process allowed them to be more mindful of
their impact. This was a very important realization. It began to show that a
possible way of reducing environmental harm was by increasing our capacity
to become involved with the working of our homes.
    Our interest in the off-grid ways of heating, therefore, revealed to us that
the senses and the human body were important lenses through which to
understand grave social problems, such as the changes in climate caused by
the domestic burning of fossil fuels. By taking a greater interest in the mun-
dane, “embodied, affective details of habitation,”35 we could learn a great
deal about how energy is channeled, generated, used, manipulated, invested,
stored, and re-directed through unique lifestyles and unique ways of heat-
ing, cooling, powering, refrigerating, etc. These embodied geographies of
domestic architecture provided us with important evidence on the many
ways in which habitation skills may radiate out to the rest of the world and
therefore on the large potential to “re-engineer” affect36 and thus enact a
more sustainable way of living.


4 (Off)Roads

The short and narrow slope descended sharply down the bank of the Mack-
enzie River. Deep, compact snow rested heavily upon its many layers of
suffocated ice. Upon all this whiteness a few pallid tracks—marked by the
sparse vehicles that had ventured down before us—faintly showed the way.
The lane then bent gently to the right, leading to the hardened icy surface
of the Mackenzie. It is there that it met one of the continent’s longest riv-
ers and one of the Northwest Territories’ most important roadways. Born
from the waters of Great Slave Lake, the Mackenzie travelled for 1,738
kilometers to form a massive labyrinthine delta and disorderly disperse in
the Beaufort Sea. The river had been cast under the spell of seasonal ice
for almost 100 days by then. Congealment had given birth to an ice-road
network that sinuously contorted its way through the meandering delta,
reaching the otherwise–isolated communities of Aklavik and Tuktoyaktuk.
It was toward Aklavik that we were driving.
     I was behind the wheel. The mid-morning fog lingered in the air,
wrapped in a mantle of anemic clouds and frozen mist. The feeble sky
folded itself onto the blanched path. White, white, and whiteii—it looked
as if white was everything the world had to give, its shallow atonality the
only chromatic expression of life. What happened next took a mere sec-
ond. Blinded by the pervasive mist, my aimless eyes failed to inform my
steering hands of the impending turn. The unchained tires of our Dodge
ii.
ries_12.jpg
                                            57
 58                                   (Off)Roads
Durango grunted as I mistook the starboard-side powdery riverbank for
the actual road. The hood lurched forward, as if punched violently. Then
all that could be felt was the disturbed ground giving way underneath us
with a sinister thump. Before I could take stock of what had happened, for
a brief moment, optimism overtook me and I thrust my foot on the gas,
only to sink more hopelessly. We were now stuck even deeper. With the
forbidding air hovering around –15°C (5°F), all I could do was turn off the
engine to save fuel, drop my head, and mumble “sorry.” What had to hap-
pen next, I was afraid, was beyond me.
Tank Farms and Utilidors
Jon and I had left for the Northwest Territories six days before. Our Air
North plane, a throwback Hawker-Siddeley 748, had puddle-jumped its
way north from Whitehorse—connecting the dots between castaway places
like Old Crow, Dawson City, and Inuvik and leaving behind crates of pea-
nut butter, chips, soda, and other long-shelf-life comestibles. We had sat in
the small cabin impatiently, amidst thrill-seekers, government salarymen,
­modern-day explorers, and locals returning from distant Costco stores, as the
 Rolls-Royce Dart turbo prop engine droned on. The flight had been unset-
 tling from the very get-go. A large “CUT HERE IN CASE OF EMER-
 GENCY” sign painted above a segmented square frame on the fuselage
 had rattled my nerves as I climbed aboard. Jon, who was still working on
 acquiring a taste for adventure airliners, had felt his heart stop after a barely
 perceptible but unforgettable stall-like vibration during takeoff. ­Neither of
 us was in a serene enough mood to appreciate the stunning beauty of the
 tundra unfolding underneath us, yet Jon’s field notes had managed at least
 to capture its appearance:
      From the air the Mackenzie River Delta—at least the extent of its mas-
      sive area visibleiii through my limited porthole—is an expanse of white
      and grey. It’s a monochrome echo of a pattern I’ve seen before: the splat-
      terings of bacon fat, water, and soap left in a frying pan after breakfast,
      irregular bubbles of oil-like dark polka dots in an orange sheen. In the
      summer I can imagine how the scene below me would be reversed: the
      menisci of myriad islands pushing back in the water of the Mackenzie,
      light land amid a dark stilt stream, but today the scheme is much more
iii.
ries_01.jpg
                                        (Off)Roads                                      59
      subtle. Today, in the middle of winter, stunted trees poke about the snow,
      the halftone pattern created by their tops the only hint amongst a sea
      of ice and snow.
      We landed safe and sound.
      Inuvik, the regional capital, was the port o’ call for about 4,000 people.
Many of them had come from away, either to exploit the riches of what had
yet to become Northern Canada’s longest natural gas pipeline, or to settle the
busy government affairs that all frontier towns spun. Others, ethnic Inuvi-
aluit and Gwich’in, had been there not from time immemorial, but at least
since the late 1960s. It was then that the territorial and federal governments
had built Inuvik almost overnight to compensate for the unreliability of the
former designated hub, flood-prone Aklavik, and citizens had begun migrat-
ing there.
      We were part of a different, ongoing migration. Throngs of ­academics—
mostly of the hard-nosed variety—regularly invaded Inuvik and the sur-
rounding area in order to study anything the Western Arctic allowed. With
more and more federal grant money cast upon the many units of analysis
of the Great White North—in a politico-economic attempt to fuel local
business and flex the muscles of national sovereignty—Inuvik rightly cast
itself as a mecca of scientific fieldwork. In light of that, we had figured we’d
blend in easily for our first Arctic venture. To make matters even easier, the
Aurora Research Institute—a sort of one-stop shop for all gatekeeping and
data collection and storage needs—had flung its arms wide open to us as
we were just about the only ivory-tower dwellers brave (or foolish) enough
to come up in February and the first they’d ever met who were interested in
the sheer mundanity of the local utilidor.iv
      Together with the tank farm (more on that shortly), the utilidor was in
fact the most glaring manifestation of Inuvik’s status as an off-grid town.
That’s right: an off-grid town. North of the 54th parallel, Canada is laden
with villages, towns, and even cities disconnected from region-wide natural
gas and electricity networks. As a matter of fact, there are hardly any region-
wide networks to speak of up there. The population density is simply too
low and the distances dramatically too prohibitive to build grids of any
significance. As a result most of these minute conurbations operate inde-
pendently of one another—typically fueled by massive generators burning
diesel shipped from the South (here via the Mackenzie during summer)—
hence being technically “off-grid.”
iv.
.jpg
60                                (Off)Roads
     The utilidor had nothing to do with fuel. Power lines drooping from
electricity poles webbed Inuvik’s curiously colorful, LEGO-like homes not
unlike they did elsewhere, rendering each dwelling responsible not for gen-
erating power but rather, and more simply, just enough pecuniary matter to
pay monthly bills. The utilidor, instead, was a network of large pipes, about
three feet in diameter, propped up on stilts two- to four-feet high above
ground. Dull in its metallic gray color, robotic in its clumsy cubic shell,
and fully unassuming but entirely unmissable, the utilidor snaked its way
around Inuvik, connectingv every house with every apartment complex
and every store with every school and government building. All those, in
the end, were linked by the utilidor to Septic Lagoon (more conveniently
known as Shit Lake) on one business end and with the two sources of fresh
water on the other end—the Mackenzie River in the winter and a nearby
lake in the warm(er) season.
     The utilidor, make no mistake, was not an extravagant form of vernacular
architecture. This was no Lasqueti: the utilidor hadn’t been dreamed up by a
resourceful guy with excess plumbing. Indeed it was serious business, free of
any improvisation, adornment, and intended aesthetic value. Its instrumen-
tal raison d’être was to be found in the permafrost, or, better yet, out of it;
Inuvik’s Arctic climate was such that burying common mains and sewers in
the permafrost would have been a foolhardy enterprise. Really, all it did to
stand out was be visible—in contrast to the usually arcane, sheltered, intro-
verted nature of city infrastructures worldwide; a big deal for easily amused
cultural scientists of our ilk.
     But the utilidor had no semiotic monopoly over Inuvik’s off-grid iden-
tity. The tank farmvi located right downtown, steps away from the Mack-
enzie, was an equally powerful landmark. There, monumentally large tanks
of the size and type found in large oil refineries stored enough fuel to
generate electricity for the whole town until the next cargo ship would
arrive. Together with a natural gas plant, located not too far from town, the
tank farm yielded all the comfort and convenience that the off-gridders
we had met in BC, Alberta, and the Yukon would scavenge, assemble, and
harvest all on their own. Power, light, and heat: all courtesy of humon-
gous turbines, machinery, and experts. And this, incidentally, was a serious
problem for us.
     House visit after house visit, Inuvik’s off-gridness had become buried
under a bewildered chorus of “What do you mean we’re off-grid?” In a way,
v.
Territories_06.jpg
vi.
Territories_07.jpg
                                   (Off)Roads                                61
the residents’ confusion was justified: they weren’t truly off-grid in spirit.
Solar panels and wind turbines were unheard of. Light bulbs, TV sets, and
toasters went on anytime a switch was flicked. Central heating kicked in
regardless of personal involvement. Shit Lake was out of sight and out of
smell’s reach. True, the costs of electricity and heat were a real issue here—
despite subsidies—but the depth of insightful and original observations we
could produce about the subject wasn’t enough to justify the lunchtime
expenditurevii on the $15 package of expired frozen tortellini from North
Mart, let alone that of the flight up here.
     As Jon and I listlessly waited in traffic at the only stop light in town,
it occurred to us that we might have very little to go on. The visuals had
been remarkable but the interview data were lacking the usual fervor and
depth. A micro-grid, after all, was nothing but a grid, and a grid was some-
thing much too easily confined to the background of daily consciousness.
Though Inuvik, Aklavik, Tuktoyaktuk, and many other Arctic towns were
actually off-grid, there were no “off-gridders” here. There were no “errant
trajectories,” no “infinitesimal transformations,” no “tactics,” no indepen-
dently woven assemblages of light and power, no technological choices for
an alternate synchronicity, no re-inventions of everyday life.1 From now on,
we decided, the word “off-gridders” would only be dispensed when referring
to self-sufficient households, and not to residents of off-grid towns. Tank
farms and locally owned and managed micro-grids were simply no good for
us, other than for confirming—interestingly enough by serving as a perfect
contradiction—our arguments on habitation and involvement.
     “I have an idea!” I exclaimed as the light turned green.
                                        ***
“Is everyone ok?”
     “Yeah. But what do we do now?”
     I got out of the driver’s seat and quickly went to inspect the damage.
Nothing was bent or broken or displaced, save for a pile of fresh snow. While
Jon and William—a “fixer” sent from the Aurora Research Institute to guide
us—pushed from the front, I pushed on the accelerator in reverse gear. It
didn’t work. Going forward was no option either. I apologized again for
getting us stuck in this mess. “I swear I drove to Tuk yesterday and I didn’t
make one single mistake,” I pleaded my case with William. He was silent,
unruffled. Jon seemed equally unperturbed, so much so that he unlatched
his satchel bag and looked for the right lens to start recording the moment.
vii.
Territories_04.jpg
 62                                 (Off)Roads
      My big idea, two days before, was to start focusing our attention
on the one type of assemblage that made Arctic towns feel, somehow,
off-grid: their roads. A 160 km ice roadviii—one of the longest in the
­world—connected Inuvik with Tuk(toyaktuk), to the north. A slightly
 shorter one led west to Aklavik. Collecting road stories and driving the
 roads ourselves, I thought, would yield interesting information about the
 diffused sense of remove as well as about the likely inconveniences of
 living in such distant locales.
      “Well, at least,” I surmised as William started dialing for help, “this
 should turn out to be an interesting bit of participant observation, eh?”
      Jon twitched.
      “No one’s answering,” William announced, poker-faced.
 Roads, Access, and Insulation
 Mobility is a key aspect of life both on- and off-grid. Accessibility of places
 of employment, supply stores, schools, medical centers, and administrative
 institutions is essential to individual survival and collective well-being. Social
 justice, democratic inclusion, political participation, community integration,
 employment, education, health, and leisure are nearly impossible without
 physical mobility, even as people learn to rely more on distance-bridging
 cellular, satellite, and computer-mediated communication.
      Geographer Tim Cresswell has conceptualized mobilities as varying
 constellations of practices, experiences, and representations of movement.2
Different places afford local inhabitants with different patterns of mobility.
These patterns, or constellations, are comprised of things like the different
speeds of mobility, its costs, motives, frictions, rhythms, sensations, routes,
and degrees of remove from other places. Take the concept of “route,” for
example. “Mobility is channeled”3 along conduits such as trails, dirt roads,
town arteries, highways, freeways, shipping routes, airways, and railroads.
Depending on the kind of existing routes and how these are used, places
have a different feel. From the busy and lively streets of Covent Garden to
the festive moods of Las Vegas’s main strip, and from the frenzied pace of
Kowloon to the serene atmosphere of the Camino de Santiago de Com-
postela in Spain, different mobility constellations constitute different places
and ways of life.
      Canadian off-gridders had more distinct mobility patterns than most of
us. Over two years of fieldwork, Jon and I had to resort to 4 × 4 vehicles,
viii.
Territories_03.jpg
                                 (Off)Roads                                   63
passenger boats, float planes, bush planes, canoes, kayaks, bikes, RTVs,
snowmobiles, and snowshoes to reach off-gridders’ homes across the coun-
try. This is because typically off-gridders’ homes were linked to the rest of
the world by record-setting long driveways, dirt roads, bushy trails, steep
paths, un-bridged bodies of water, and other elbow-scratching conduits
that most people would find difficult or inconvenient to access on a regular
basis. These routes connected off-grid homes to distant cities or nearby
towns, but also simultaneously kept them somewhat separate from those
places. Such careful balance of connection and disconnection lent off-grid-
ders’ places an aura of relative isolation characterized by slower rhythms of
life, distinct soundscapes, cleaner air, closeness with wildlife, a diffuse sense
of stillness and peace, and a pervasive feeling of being insulated from the
dangers, annoyances, and noxious forces of the rest of the world. Inconve-
nient access routes were quintessential to filtering out unwanted presences.
­Relatively inconvenient routes, in other words, deeply shaped the feel of
 off-grid mobility constellations nationwide.
     As an off-grid region, the Mackenzie Delta was no different in this
 regard. Besides airways, Inuvik was accessible by only one road. The Demp-
 ster Highway started off in Dawson City, Yukon, 736 km south. One of
 North America’s most famous roads, the mostly unpaved Dempster tra-
 versed vast wilderness areas and offered extremely few vital services, making
 it difficult for drivers to refuel, rest, or make repairs. Isolation, darkness,
 tire- and window-shredding shrapnel, and wolves weren’t enough. While
 one could drive the Dempster Highway to Inuvik in either winter (weather
 permitting) or summer, it was impossible to do so during parts of spring
 and fall. During spring the ice that formed natural bridges over the Peel and
 the Mackenzie rivers would break up, but not yet in small enough chunks
 to allow for ferry navigation across the river. Throughout the short autumn
 season ice—only beginning to take form at that time—impaired boat access
 while not being consistent enough to allow for driving. During these times,
 respectively referred to as “break-up” and “freeze-up,” Inuvik was only acces-
 sible via expensive4 air links.
     Other communities in the Mackenzie Delta—like Aklavik and Tuk—
were only accessible via Inuvik. However, during the warm months, car
access to these towns from Inuvik was impossible due to the permafrost.
At that time of the year only small boats could wind their way through the
maze-like delta waters, which incidentally revolutionized their directional
patterns year after year, further complicating travel. During the cold months,
on the other hand, ice roads made access possible, though wintry weather
could hamper travel at a moment’s notice and make simply being out-
side extremely dangerous. The day before our unfortunate Aklavik-bound
64                                 (Off)Roads
outing, Jon, Jamie—an Ontario transplant working at our lodge, whose
Arctic-acclimatized eyes generously guided our ice road introduction—and
I had experienced precisely a taste of that thrill.
     We had departed from Inuvik at the crack of dawn (roughly 10 a.m. at
that time of year) and had driven our Durango at a 70 km/h clip on the
Mackenzie River for 160 km (100 miles). Then, suddenly, the route had
disappeared before our eyes. The road up to that point had been rather
ordinary.ix As wide as a three-lane highway, with no stop signs, marking
lanes, or advertising billboards, trafficked by about one vehicle every ten
minutes or so, and policed by no one but moose and low-flying ravens, on
a clear day like that the Mackenzie River route stood out only for its eerie
polar landscape.
     But as we abandoned the Mackenzie and gradually curved right to drive
on the frozen Arctic Ocean for the last 40 kilometers to Tuk, the visibility
had begun to drop steadily. The ice road had been easy to follow until then:
the track had a distinct azure hue and was clearly marked by grooves cre-
ated by maintenance vehicles and kept visible by other cars, whose passing
accidentally swept wind-drifted snow off the icy surface. But as the morn-
ing sun had given way to a low overcast ceiling, a faint but effectual wind
had gradually begun swirling fresh heaps of powdery snow and deposit-
ing them on the road surface. The drifting snow had rendered the ocean-
carved path nearly indistinguishable from the milky horizon and utterly
featureless landscape. (After all, what land features can one expect while
driving on the sea?) Though the likelihood of hitting something was low,
the prospect of unknowingly driving for miles in the wrong direction en
route to the North Pole was mildly unnerving to say the least. Fortunately,
we got out unscathed.
                                         ***
     Luckily, we hadn’t had to wait too long for help. A half-sunken slab of
blue metal stood out in the field of white snow like a sore hitchhiking thumb
begging for a ride. The very first vehicle to stop was a muscular Ford truck
on whose bed I spotted a bloody, still steaming-hot moose carcass loosely
wrapped up in old pieces of cloth and tarpaulin.
     “Moses?” William puzzled, as the truck driver rolled down his window.
     “If it isn’t my big brother stuck in the ditch!” Moses noted with a teasing
chuckle at the sight of William.
     “It’s all my fault,” I remarked, trying to help William save face.
ix.
Territories_13.jpg
                                 (Off)Roads                                  65
     Moses glanced at me from his driver seat, his engine still running: “No
native eyes, eh? What’s the matter? Southerners can’t tell white from white?”
We all exploded in laughter.
     Over the next 10 minutes I became the happy recipient of a few more
teasing one-liners while Moses made good use of the ropes that everyone
habitually carried in their vehicles in the North. Though we were close
enough to Inuvik that we could have trekked back in search of help, there
was no need for an embarrassing walk of shame. After just a few tugs and
skids, we were mobile again and free to go.
     “Just make sure you keep the road signs to your right next time!” Moses
winked as he sped off.
     “What signs?”
                                      ***
     As Conrad had observed back in Edmonton, most Canadian ­off-gridders
were simply hooked on gasoline. Gasoline was regularly needed to power
the cars and trucks necessary to travel from rural locations to town-
and city-based services and supplies. Petrol was also burned whenever
­off-gridders flew on airplanes or sailed away on boats for chores, work,
 or leisure (as many did). And diesel—as our visits to Inuvik, Aklavik, and
 Tuk had revealed—was also the lifeline that remote off-grid communities
 depended on to survive. It was a dire situation but as things were, very
 limited alternatives existed. Off-gridders’ personal routes, and the access
 routes to off-grid towns, simply could not help relying on carbon-based
 infrastructures. As several individuals had remarked, “cars, planes, fuel, and
 roads are the toughest grid to get off of.”
     The burning of gasoline was costly and dirty—and often the source of
 guilt among environmentally minded off-gridders—but it was also an indis-
 pensable tool for individuals, families, and communities hell-bent on insu-
 lating themselves from the rest of the world through the mixed blessings of
 remoteness and difficult access. To be sure, there was a good degree of incon-
 venience involved in limiting access to off-grid places—as our road stories
 had personally taught us—but the sense of remove that inconvenience begot
 seemed to make it all worth it. Even we—once we learned to keep “signs”
 on the right—had begun to appreciate the peacefulness and beauty of the
 tundra. That feeling of remove was precisely why the Mackenzie Delta felt
 so off-grid, so much like the places we had visited and enjoyed before.
     Access issues, in other words, shaped the mobility constellations of off-
 grid towns and off-grid homes similarly. Whether we looked at Inuvik,
 Lasqueti, Haines Junction, or the back-roads of the Alberta prairies, the
 routes, remove, and costs of off-grid mobilities affected the atmospheres of
66                                   (Off)Roads
these places the same way. And how could they not? After all, the value of
everyday life on our continent is so often measured by variables, such as easy
access to shopping and entertainment or to a central location, and proximity
to popular getaway destinations. In this geo-cultural context, for anyone to
challenge the importance of these amenities and learn to enjoy the plea-
sure, rather than the tyranny of distances, was tantamount to re-inventing a
whole new way of life.
     But remove wasn’t everything. The differences between off-grid homes
and the residences we visited in the off-grid towns of the Mackenzie Delta
were greater than their similarities. The way remove from the grid was prac-
ticed just did not explain enough. Our very understanding of what off-
grid meant was under serious challenge. How could remove from a regional
infrastructure be a necessary and sufficient condition for being off-grid?
Was the definition perhaps in need of updating? Should we have amended
it to exclude connections from any kind of infrastructure, no matter how big
or small? That would have made sense and yet, had we done so, we would
have ended up excluding households like Conrad’s—households that were
connected to the mother of all grids but in many other ways so much more
independent than other gasoline-reliant off-gridders. It was clear that we
needed to rethink what off-grid meant, or, at the very least, better specify
and qualify it.
     A possible way out of this conundrum would have been to create catego-
ries. A category for this type of off-grid home, that type of off-grid home,
this type of off-grid town, and so forth. But categories are often unsatisfac-
tory. It actually seemed ironic, if not downright offensive, to place individu-
als who had dedicated their lives to “living outside the box” back into tidy
taxonomies. It would also have done a great disservice to our relational and
non-representational approach to the subject, which was meant to focus
on relations, processes, and connections, rather than static individuations,
ideal types, and separations. With no intention to update a widely accepted
technical definition that didn’t belong to us in the first place, and with even
less interest in drawing a grid to order and rank off-gridders, we turned our
attention to the sky.
     The sky had been in constant movement throughout our journey through
the Northwest Territories. Air turbulence, ice pellets, coalescing particles of
fog, shifting weather fronts, and even an unforgettable display of Northern
Lightsx had kept us lively company throughout the trip—the sky was just
awash with multiple movements and coalescings of different kinds. So it
x.
ries_08.jpg
                                    (Off)Roads                           67
was in the sky, and more precisely in the idea of constellations, that we
found the answer. We just needed to assemble a constellation of not so much
mobilities—because Cresswell’s idea was born out of the desire to under-
stand that particular phenomenon—but of power. With that in place we
could better understand the meanings of comfort, convenience, efficiency,
and all the other facets of the off-grid quest for a better life.


5 Power Constellations

The opportunity to flesh out the fledgling power constellation idea soon
presented itself. While surfing the web in search of Saskatchewan-based off-
gridders, I stumbled across Ron and Johanna’s “For Sale” sign.ii Without
as much as a second thought, I fired them an email. Ron replied promptly,
“Do you know how far we live? We’re 100 kilometers away from the nearest
road. You can’t possibly come all the way here and stay only for a few hours!
You and Jon can be our guests for a few days—so you can really see what we
do.” Now I just needed to figure out a way to get there.
      Power is an interesting word. Power stands for authority, control, sover-
eignty, economic capital, military-industrial hegemony, social stratification,
and all that. But power—especially in everyday usage—is synonymous with
something seemingly more immediate, proximate, and concrete. Thus, we
may talk of “engine power” that allows us to drive faster, of “body power” that
enables us to jump higher, or of “domestic power” that permits us to live com-
fortable, connected, and convenient lives.1 What is truly interesting is that the
dictionary definition of power—that is, the ability or capacity to act—refers to
all of the above. But power is mostly studied by social scientists as a political
force. Power in the other, more physical, sense is instead routinely confined
into a “black box” hidden from consciousness,2 relegated to the back rooms of
domestic stages,3 and outright ignored by most social scientists.4 So, in coining
our simple concept of power constellations, we wanted to try and make our
understanding of physical power more concrete, systematic, and simple.
ii.
                                      69
70                       Power Constellations
   Taking inspiration from the idea of mobility constellations, we defined a
power constellation as a historically and geographically specific pattern of
power generation, distribution, and application. Similar to Cresswell,5 we
viewed a constellation as an assemblage—that is, an ensemble of objects,
practices, experiences, and representations that made sense together. All
objects, practices, experiences, and representations of, and about, power are
entangled in “meshworks”6 of organic and inorganic materials and tech-
nologies, landscapes, and multiple other entities and forces. These mesh-
works—like our homes, for example—are the sites where power is lived.
To make the concept even more useful, we then proceeded to identify 10
components of it: motive-force, friction, route, sensibility, interconnectivity,
availability, cost, externality, pace, and efficiency. Equipped with this list, we
flew to Saskatchewan.
Have Cessna, Will Travel
The bad news shot at us like an arrow out of the sky. The crackling voice
on the other end of the cell line dryly announced that no Cessna 185
was currently equipped with landing skis, despite our earlier arrangement
with the airline. If we wanted to, we could still charter a twin-engine
deHavilland Otter, but at the cost of $3,000: double the earlier agreed-
upon price. I hung up the phone and sank my face into my hands. Jon
and I had designed our Saskatchewan itinerary around this flight into the
Boreal Forest and we knew we couldn’t afford for this to go wrong. We
had already flown to Saskatoon and driven a rental 4 × 4 halfway to our
destination in the far north of the province. Now the plan was falling apart
at the worst possible time.
   I pushed aside my mocha, scattered our travel receipts on the small coffee
shop table, and crunched a few numbers on a napkin. I mumbled uncon-
vincing “plan B’s” to Jon, then asked to borrow his iPhone again. I soon
learned that a different company had a Cessna on skis. Because the new
pick-up point was nearer to us, the flight to Ron and Johanna’s would be
longer and costlier than the original plan: $2,700 for the round trip. But
it was still cheaper than three grand and it required less driving on snow-
choked backcountry highways. We had no alternative.
   We drove for a couple of hours and checked into a motel. It snowed all
night. We reached the air terminal the following morning, where we finally
shook hands with our pilot: a soft-spoken, friendly young man with boyish
good looks. Kyle looked 21 or maybe 22. As I loaded my backpack behind
the back seat, I ached to pry into how many flying hours Kyle had accu-
mulated over his career. Instead—as I figured I should be gentle with the
                               Power Constellations                                   71
feelings of someone entrusted with my life—I inquired whether he knew
where Johanna and Ron’s place was. He said he knew the lake.iii
      There are thousands of lakes in northern Saskatchewan. Some are over-
grown ponds, some are big enough to swallow cities, but all have one thing
in common: during the winter they are frozen deep and fully covered in
snow—a characteristic that renders their features from the air as indistinct
as holes on a piece of Gruyere cheese. Though Kyle exuded a laid-back sense
of confidence, right before departure I secretly marked the landing strip’s
coordinates on my hand-held GPS. Just in case. Though this all seemed
surreal to me, the trip was all but routine for Ron and Johanna.
      There were no roads to Johanna and Ron’s house. None. No walking
paths, no snowmobile trails, no logging roads, no cross-country ski tracks.
A chartered flight was their only way home. Floatplanes could land on snow
during winter and on water during summer. About twice a year—generally
before break-up and right after freeze-up—the two homesteaders would
go to town to stock up. The flight would cost the same whether the cargo
space was empty or full, so they’d plan their trips strategically. They’d fly
in a whole pig or a side of beef on the pick-up leg, for instance, unload it
and stick it in the freezer, then fly to town carrying along something like
machinery needing repair. Then three or four days later, on their way back
home, they’d charter a Cessna 185 or a deHavilland Beaver—depending on
how much stuff they had accumulated on their resupply spree.
      Air mile-collecting jet-setters would no doubt be chagrined to learn that
the 50-minute flight featured no upgrade eligibility, in-flight entertainment,
or snack service. However, Kyle was kind enough to provide an old cloth that
Jon and I used to wipe the ice condensation from the plastic windowsiv every
five minutes or so. Kyle was even kind enough to fly an extra circle over the
house to let Jon record some quality footage. Kyle was a very good pilot too:
the landing on the frozen lake turned out to be an absolute greaser.
      Standing in the snow, Ron and Johanna, both in their fifties, of tall
stature and self-assured but unpretentious poise, wore season-appropriate
clothing for the −20°C (−4°F) weather. As we received their warm welcome,
I kept recalling Ron’s words in an email we had exchanged: “save for forest
firefighters a few years ago,” he wrote, “we’ve rarely had any visitors.” But
as we stood by the frozen lake’s edge exchanging mutual first impressions,
I began to attribute the paucity of guests to the hefty airfare alone, rather
than to any antisocial disposition on our hosts’ part. Though “no social but-
terflies”—in their own words—Ron and Johanna gave off the vibe of being
iii.
iv.
72                            Power Constellations
genuinely delighted to meet two perfect strangers who would live with them
for three days.
      As Kyle had no time for tea, Ron and Johanna quickly traded him an
envelope to mail off and three bags full of garbage in exchange for a small
parcel delivery—a foot valve for the water line, shipped from the hardware
store. Soon enough he was back in the cockpit.
      “Do you mind if we wait a minute to see him take off ?” Ron asked as I
flung my backpack on my shoulders. “It’s always a pretty good show.”
      “Well, do you mind if I film the whole thing?” Jon opportunistically
inquired.
      As the Cessna skidded away, its engine noise whispered lower and lower
from farther afield—its echo reverberating across the surrounding hills and
growing more buzz-like as it went, sounding as if powered by a swarm of
bumble bees. Once out of sight and sound, the rest of society suddenly
became but a faint notion.
The Farthest Home
At 1,536 square feet, Ron and Johanna’s two-story house wasn’t lavish by
North American standards, but it had plenty of room for them to spend
time together or to enjoy on their own whenever they needed a break from
each other. Johanna liked sewing,v cooking, canning, and working in the
garden. Ron took delight in buildingvi wood furniture and smaller dec-
orative objects. These hobbies and skills played key functional roles too.
Johanna—with a formal educational background in nutrition and dietet-
ics—managed to fill the shelves of both a walk-in pantry and a secondary
food storage area with preserves. Ron—a self-described “Jack of all trades
and master of none” with training in industrial electronics—kept in stock
tools, nuts, bolts, nails, lumber, and mechanical parts to fix almost anything.
      Save for the long winter—when life slowed down considerably—they
both kept quite busy, without ever being in a rush. The rhythms of late spring
and summer were largely synchronized with those of the vegetables and fruits
growing in both the greenhouse and outside: tomatoes, asparagus, zucchini,
peppers, melons, celery, different kinds of lettuce, corn, green beans, wax
beans, carrots, beets, cabbage, broccoli, cauliflower, Brussels sprouts, potatoes,
strawberries, raspberries, Saskatoon berries, rhubarb, currants, and apples. To
grow anything above 56°N, they explained, was not easy.vii
v.
vi.
vii.
                              Power Constellations                             73
       Underlying all their domestic efforts was an uncompromising commit-
ment to “self-sufficiency.”
       “It’s a lot of satisfaction,” Johanna explained when I asked her what self-
sufficient meant to her.
       “Where does the satisfaction come from?”
       “It’s something I’ve always dreamed of doing since I was a teenager and
I’ve been lucky enough to be able to do it. To sit down at the table and know
that 90% of what’s on the table is stuff that you grew or made yourself is a
very satisfying thing.”
       Self-sufficiency, Ron added, is “the feeling that we’re providing for our-
selves . . .”
       “And,” Johanna interjected, “that we’re not dependent on the grocery
store, or some farmer in California, and the whole distribution system.”
       Self-sufficiency was obviously impossible. It if were possible, Ron and
Johanna should have been able to manufacture solar panels out of their
sandy soil, squeeze ethanol from their own corn, and do without flying to
town for occasional shopping. However, the ideal of at least approaching
self-sufficiency and enjoying a better life was what inspired them to move
here 14 years ago.
       Ron and Johanna had been off-grid altogether since 1979. In 1999 they
left the state of Maine, after they had homesteaded there for about 20 years.
Seeking more space and more “adventure,” they decided to look for land in
Saskatchewan, where they knew they could petition the provincial govern-
ment to lease affordable land north of 56°. They bought a few topographic
maps and chartered a floatplane to explore the region from the air, until they
discovered,viii and fell in love with at first sight, their place.
       Everything had to be brought in by floatplane and thus minutely allot-
ted in advance. All the construction material, for example, was flown in by a
twin-engine Otter over 10 trips made throughout a weekend. But first the site
had to be cleared of snow and trees, a waterline had to be hand-dug, a leach
field prepared, and foundations laid. And of course, a temporary shelter—an
expedition tent serving as their home for three months—had to be assembled.
Their photo album told the details of the building process: from Johanna’s
sketch of the floor plan to the placement of every stud, every triple-pane win-
dow, and every insulating vapor barrier. Ron’s brother—the only “stranger”
in the pictures—provided muscle help, but otherwise this was very much an
exercise in self-sufficiency.
       As we sat in the living room overlooking the lake and the hills to the
south, the stories illustrated their life quest. “This is the land of milk and
viii.
74                            Power Constellations
honey,” Ron reflected. “We’ve got the best of both worlds here. We have the
peace and quiet of the wilderness. And we have modern comforts and con-
veniences: satellite TV and internet, radio, refrigeration. You’d never know
you’re a hundred miles out in the bush. There is the feeling of accomplish-
ment of being off-the-grid, the sense of satisfaction that we’re providing
for ourselves, that we’re not dependent on the power grid to keep supplied.
We’ve got everything we want.” But as they grew older and slowly reached
the age when access to medical facilities became more important, they felt it
necessary to inch closer to town. Their plan was still to remain off-grid, but
this time at a more accessible location on the Nova Scotia coast.
     As the February sun plowed through the morning clouds, the questions
and answers of the first interview dissipated. As I scribbled a few notes and
Jon changed batteries, a loudly ticking solar-powered plastic toy plant and a
cantankerous wall clock sanctioned the passage of each second—sounding a
domestic melody that over the next three days would become as habitual as
Johanna’s clankingix in the kitchen and the fire poppingx and hissing inside
the woodstove. After a hearty lunch, we resumed our conversation outdoors.
     A loop about three kilometers long stretched north of their homestead,
hugging low-rising ground and weaving its way through a sparse forest of
conifers. Though Ron and Johanna maintained their trail with the footsteps
of one daily walk, we latched on snowshoes and grabbed ski poles to conquer
the slushier stretches. Once the wind turbine’s innocuous but detectable
hum was past, the southerly breeze’s whispers and the soft tune of snow
powder twirling in the air met no sound other than our own weighty strides.
In the midst of this soundscape, Ron had no difficulty explaining the com-
forts of the peace and quiet they enjoyed here. There were inconveniences
and worries too, of course. Wildfires, importunate black bears, and oh, not
having a dishwasher.
     Despite the lack of a dishwasher there were a few amenities, besides the
stillness of silence, which made life enjoyable so deep in the wilderness. To
provide electricity there was an 800-watt photovoltaic array, a 2-kW wind
turbine, and a 6-kW diesel generator needed to maintain the longevity of a
near-one tonne worth of 2-volt deep-cycle batteries capable of storing over
1,500 amps. To provide heat, two woodstoves consumed pine and spruce—
and one of the woodstoves heated water and served as the cooker and oven
as well. But there was more.
     Passive solar floor design and thick wall insulation allowed for savings on
firewood. Water flowed from the well to the shower and the sinks channeled
ix.
x.
                         Power Constellations                                75
by an electric pump. Solid human waste first corralled in the indoor com-
posting toilet through a simple bucket-like container aged slowly and even-
tually fed fruit trees. Compact fluorescent bulbs gave light. The absence of
blow driers, a microwave oven, and toaster spared their batteries a heavy
blow. Chest freezers—all placed facing east outdoors and sheltered under
the porch from the direct sun—remained unplugged during the colder
months. Thick walls made the indoor refrigerator extra efficient. An Irid-
ium satellite phone could reach help in no time. And chess and Scrabble
provided timeless unplugged entertainment.
   Not to say that entertainment or information of the plugged-in variety
wasn’t available. Every afternoon, while Johanna knitted or read a book, Ron
would find a seat on his squeaking rocking chair and punctually tune in to the
four o’clock financial newscast on MSNBC. Then, using the same satellite
signal feeding the TV dish, he would log on to the internet, check further
news, and occasionally make a mysterious transaction. Ron and Johanna were
essentially retired (though occasional seasonal work setting up expedition
outpost camps would occupy Ron), and their savings, as it turned out, grew
from Ron’s stock transactions. Even here, 100 miles from the nearest shop,
amidst flying pigs, roaming hungry wolves, and real ursine ups and downs,
the stock exchange’s bull and bear seemed to leave consequential traces.
   Complete self-sufficiency wasn’t truly what was going on in Ron and
Johanna’s little paradise. It was perhaps more a quest for a fleeting glimpse
of sovereign power—a power wrestled from utilities, crowded stores, busy
intersections, happening urban scenes, and countryside communities. A
power wrestled only partially, true, but no less meaningfully. After all, no
constellation appears alone in the sky, does it?
Costs, Efficiencies, Externalities, and More
The study of power constellations aims to describe and understand why,
how, and by whom power is generated, distributed, and utilized. Power, like
mobility, “is a resource that is differentially accessed”7 either by virtue of
limited opportunity or personal choice. Different places, for example, are
characterized by different power constellations. Power constellations have
also varied across history, as resource configurations, social expectations,
and different technologies have changed.8 As of late, for instance, power
constellations worldwide have “splintered,” giving rise to multiple cross-
national, sub-regional, and even micro-local entanglements differentiated
and stratified along social, economic, political, and technological fault lines.9
These fractures show us that power is no longer the exclusive domain of
uniform and monopolistic structures, as it often was in the past. As power
76                       Power Constellations
now flows in multiple ways, coalesces in myriad assemblages, and connects
and bypasses various groups of people, it becomes more important than ever
to examine how disparate power constellations operate in the day-to-day
lives of different individuals living in distinct places. The 10 elements below
should make the job of disentangling power constellations a bit easier.
   First, people need power for different reasons. To some degree we are all
compelled to use power to survive, but in most instances our use is informed
by degrees of choice and desire. The concept of motive-force10 captures these
dynamics of need and want and the degree of their imperativeness. Ron and
Johanna, for example, required power to light up their home, keep warm,
refrigerate their food, extract water, and operate a few appliances. This was
unsurprising—as they, like others, took pleasure in domestic comfort, clean-
liness, and convenience.11 But the real question here is why did they, as
opposed to the rest of the Western world, seek to do it on their own, off-the-
grid? In other words, how were the motive-forces of off-grid households
like theirs different?
   As seen in earlier chapters, like most other off-gridders Johanna and
Ron lived off-grid for the feeling of independence. Their independence
was relative, of course, but the heightened sense of self-reliance and self-
sufficiency gave them great satisfaction. This sense of sovereignty over their
power—that is, over their capacity to act to take care of their needs and
wants—was at the very core of the off-grid quest for a better life across the
country.12
   The concept of motive-force prompts us to ask not only why people need
and want power as well as what they need it and want it for, but also what
people are willing to do to obtain power; what type of power assemblages
people prefer and why; what kinds of power applications people are willing
to sacrifice if necessary; what reasons, values, and ideologies inform people’s
choices for power; and what lifestyle philosophies inform the choices behind
different groups’ motives to do with or without certain kinds of power and
certain power applications—to name only a few possible questions.
   Second, where does power come from? What routes does power take to
flow from its points of extraction, generation, and transformation to its points
of utilization? What are the consequences of such routes? Whom do such
routes exclude, and why? Like other forms of mobility, power is channeled.
Its infrastructures—pipes, cables, wires, mains, pipelines, etc.—are its chan-
nels, its routes. As part of their “tunneling effect,”13 such routes draw some
places in intense interaction, while marginalizing and excluding others. For
example, most off-gridders in Canada were in no position to connect to the
electricity grid given the prohibitive distance of their homes from the nearest
pole, or given the unequal political economy of rural electrification. For some,
like Ron and Johanna, this remove was a highly desired condition, but for
                          Power Constellations                                   77
others—like entire communities in the northern regions of the country—this
differential access translated into opportunity-debilitating power poverty.14
   The routes taken by power greatly matter in other respects as well.
Because many routes are out of direct view (e.g., buried underground, hid-
den in back alleys, etc.), most people feel distanced from energy dynamics
and for the most part carry on their lives in complete ignorance of, and sepa-
ration from, power channels.15 But something interesting happens when
power becomes more visible. Whenever crises occur—such as blackouts16 or
droughts17—power and its routes suddenly take center stage, changing prac-
tices of consumption18 and at times even stimulating resilient and creative
conduct.19 It is in this sense that we can understand off-grid constellations
as hubs of imaginative, re-territorializing practices that—through visible
and reflective routings and the consequent creativity and self-reliance these
originate—aim to bring order and control20 in places bypassed by the routes
of large-scale assemblages.
   The third element is a monetary one. How much does it cost to utilize power
in all its various applications? How much wattage, and therefore money, does it
cost to dry a load of clothes, to toast a slice of bread, to heat a poorly insulated
bedroom, to keep a laptop plugged in at night? And how much do competing
power utilizing technologies cost to purchase? For example, how much does it
cost to install a geothermal system? And is that system more affordable in the
long run than an old-fashioned woodstove? Few of us think regularly about the
ordinary costs of domestic power. For some people struggling with fuel poverty,
energy costs are a growing concern,21 but for many homeowners and renters
alike, the comforts and convenience of electricity and heat seem natural and
taken for granted, and their costs feel hidden and distant.22
   Off-gridders’ power constellations were characterized instead by very tan-
gible, very visible cost configurations. To save power, Johanna and Ron had
consciously chosen not to have a hair drier or a microwave oven for example,
and so had most other off-gridders. Heat-emitting electric appliances can
consume well over 1,000 watts/hour—a draw that can put a serious strain
on batteries and require the installation of larger photovoltaic arrays. Cost
awareness characterized Ron and Johanna’s domestic power constellation
in other ways. For them, reaching the grocery store was enormously expen-
sive. Their trips to town therefore had to be strategic, carefully planned,
and tightly budgeted. It made no sense for them, for example, to fly in the
spring to the butcher’s to spend thousands of dollars on meats that would
cost them a great deal of wattage to keep frozen throughout the summer.
Other off-gridders had to tackle similarly complex plans. While most of us
have come to take for granted the convenience of nearby supermarkets sell-
ing frozen goods that we can store in our freezers,23 during our visits to the
north we learned that residents of off-grid Arctic communities commonly
 78                       Power Constellations
divided up the spoils of their hunting and fishing among extended families,
friends, and neighbors—thus reducing the need to buy expensive meat and
fish imported from the south, as well as reducing the need to keep large kills
frozen for long periods of time.
     Fourth, the bills we pay are not the only costs of power. The
­socio-environmental consequences caused by extracting energy resources,
 channeling their flows, and applying power to tackle ordinary tasks give
 rise to short- and long-term ecological costs that are often hidden, but no
 less meaningful than their financial counterparts. Such costs are known as
 externalities.24 Externalities occur because we are somewhat mindless of
the indirect impacts of our high-carbon lives. As sociologist John Urry25
has pointed out: “these consequences threaten the basic elements of life
for people around the world, and especially future generations: through
melting glaciers, declining crop yields, ocean acidification, rising sea levels,
deaths from malnutrition and heat stress, displacements of people, ecosys-
tem destruction, reduced diversity, shifts in weather patterns and collapsing
ice sheets, and so on.”
     Externalities are typically the subject of distant global policies (or lack
thereof ). In contrast, off-gridders treated externalities as meaningful ongoing
concerns of their power constellations. Off-gridders engaged in local gen-
 eration of renewable power, reduced their consumption of ­non-renewables,
 and took part in many activities informed by principles of sustainability. To
 be fair, off-grid living was not always so green. At times, life in remote loca-
 tions required great expenditures in fuel to reach the workplace or the near-
 est store, and in some homes backup generators were definitely employed
 more than they should have been. However, for the most part, off-gridders
 were infinitely more aware than most other power consumers about their
 carbon footprint. While no self-styled environmentalists, Ron and Johanna,
 for example, heated their house with renewable resources harvested locally,
 and through insulation and passive solar design they made sure to use as
 little wood as possible. And while flying to town was not exactly as green as,
 say, bicycling, the distance and cost were key motivators for reducing their
 travel frequency, as well as for reusing objects of all kinds, thus reducing the
 need to go shopping.
     Power constellations differ from one another not only in terms of how
 impactful externalities are, but also in terms of how involved individuals
 are in limiting the negative environmental consequences of their choices.
 Being self-sufficient for power (at least relatively) in a utility-scarce domain
 always carried a certain risk—a certain “energy insecurity” as it were.26 Such
 insecurity drove off-gridders to develop practical skills and everyday knowl-
 edge about energy resources and to cultivate constant awareness of both
 economic costs and externalities. Thus, people like Ron and Johanna had
                        Power Constellations                                   79
learned that simple domestic practices like canning, pickling, and dehydrat-
ing locally grown foods were both financially and environmentally wise.
   Fifth, power constellations are shaped by rhythm and speed. Power
moves in different ways than, say, a train does, but it too is characterized by
important temporal dynamics. Electricity’s flow, for example, is measured
in amps. Electricity’s potential, or in a water flow analogy, pressure, is mea-
sured in volts. The product of voltage times current equals watts. A watt is
a rate of work: more precisely the rate at which work is done when an amp
of current flows through an electrical potential difference of one volt. Now,
I feel bewildered just writing this stuff, but as it turns out power shapes the
pace of your life in very immediate, intuitive, and practical ways when you
live off-grid.
   For example, like many other off-gridders, Ron and Johanna lived in
great synchrony with the weather’s seasonal and diurnal patterns because of
the changing rhythms of light and heat. So a load of laundry might have had
to wait for a sunny day, when batteries could be quickly recharged from the
drain imposed by a washing machine. By synchronizing power generation
and utilization with weather patterns, off-gridders engaged in a unique form
of slow living27—investing their everyday life with a temporal attentiveness
and care that challenged the relation between power and speed typical of
modern life.28
   Off-gridders’ practices sensitize us to the importance of power’s tem-
poral dynamics and teach us to ask questions such as: how fast can energy
resources drain, and how quickly can they be replenished? How synchro-
nized must processes of power utilization and generation be? At what type
of rhythms do different power resources and technologies work? Do these
rhythms work independently or interdependently from our own everyday
routines? How long does it take to transform a certain energy resource into
usable power?
   The sixth element is availability. Availability is a matter of how suitable
and readily obtainable something is. Of course stuff is not always ready for
our taking, so the availability of something may depend on an individual’s
skills, knowledge, creativity, resourcefulness, planning ability, and physi-
cal and technical capacities. Even from a collective standpoint the energy
resources that we have available as a global society are related to our ability
and willingness to generate, distribute, transform, utilize, dispose of, and
even re-utilize different resources. Availability is therefore a relational entity.
   Resource availability shapes people’s skills in distinct, place-sensitive
ways. Such skills profoundly characterize the features of different power
constellations. Take the availability of land to grow food and generate calo-
ries to fuel the body, for example. Johanna and Ron knew that because of
the distance to the nearest grocery store they had to make the best possible
80                      Power Constellations
use of the short growing season. This condition pushed them to localize
most of their food consumption, reducing the journey from plot to fork.29
The gardening tricks they employed to cope with local weather and climate
manifested their knowledge of local resources, their creativity, and their
ability to improvise30 and to cope with the demands of their challenging
“taskscape.”31
   Availability of resources also shapes issues such as the propensity to con-
serve. Ron and Johanna did not have unlimited water provided to them by
a municipality. To conserve the water they did have, they used a composting
toilet system that required no flushing. Billions of gallons of clean, fresh
water are flushed away annually in homes and public places, despite rising
global concerns over water scarcity. In contrast, just like Ron and Johanna,
off-gridders across Canada tended to be very mindful of the limited avail-
ability of groundwater and harvested rainwater and/or carefully maintained
groundwater wells.
   Seventh, there is efficiency: a ratio of work done on the basis of energy
supplied. Efficiency is a return on investment—a measure of the usefulness
of an input. By asking good questions about power constellations we can
learn to appreciate the nuances of different efficiencies. Questions such as:
how productive are different energy resources and forms of power genera-
tion, distribution, and application? How adaptable are power resources to
different demands and working conditions? How easy are they to use? How
environmentally efficient and sustainable are they?
   Researchers interested in energy in everyday life have remarked on effi-
ciency with regard to many different technologies, such as showers,32 patio
heaters,33 air conditioners,34 and compact fluorescent light bulbs,35 to name
only a few. Efficiency matters greatly in the context of renewable technol-
ogy as well. Take for example the efficiency of wind as a resource for power
generation. Ron and Johanna had a wind turbine capable of generating
2,000 watts, but that generating capacity was dependent on the availability
of constantly useful wind—that is, wind that was neither too strong nor too
weak. At high speeds, wind turbines automatically lock to prevent dam-
age and cease to generate electricity, and at low speeds little or no power
is produced. However, where they lived wind typically occurred in strong
gusts or was otherwise too moderate to be useful. Wind turbines generally
present other disadvantages too: they are laborious to install, can be noisy,
and can create problems in icy conditions. Because of all these problems a
monetary investment in wind turbines tended to be an uncertain one for
many off-gridders. Indeed it was not uncommon to meet off-gridders who,
like Johanna and Ron, found their investment in wind to be a relatively
inefficient one.
                          Power Constellations                                 81
    Efficiency is subject to varying personal experiences, preferences, and
practices. Of course in many power constellations, efficiency is not always
subject to reflexive, individual decision making.36 Many of us living on the
grid, for example, may install efficient compact fluorescent lights to save
energy but then may mindlessly over-illuminate a room or even leave lights
on when not needed. Efficiency was instead monitored assiduously by off-
gridders, who had to exercise special caution with their available power and
regularly checked charge displays, current usage gauges, and so on.
    Or take for example the many appliances that today are sold with an
Energy Star® rating, which symbolizes high efficiency. Though compara-
tively efficient, these technologies are often used in inefficient ways—for
example, by users who keep them on “stand-by” mode even when not needed
for long periods of time. Off-gridders across the country, on the other hand,
were on constant patrol to make appliances more efficient by taking the
time to turn them off or to even rig them so they wouldn’t cause ghost
loads (a ghost load is the electrical draw of a standby technology, such as a
TV plugged in but not turned on, or a microwave oven “on” only to display
the time of the day). Efficiency too—as these practices showed—is then a
relational quality.
    Eighth: when, where, and how does power stop flowing? And what hap-
pens during these frictions? Why do these stoppages occur, and how are they
dealt with? “Friction,” Cresswell37 observes, “is a social and cultural phenom-
enon . . . sufficient to prevent motion” or to significantly slow it down. Traffic
gridlock and border-crossing lines are good examples of mobility frictions. In
the context of power, frictions generally occur in three ways: interruptions in
energy generation, distribution breakdowns, and utilization glitches.
    Interruptions in the generation of power can occur, for example, when
energy resources become temporarily or permanently unavailable. Because
“we build our social relationships and cultural understandings to coalesce
around the continued flow of energy of familiar qualities in expected quan-
tities,”38 interruptions can have dramatic consequences. During unusu-
ally long stretches of unpropitious weather, off-gridders felt compelled to
cut down on power usage and cope with the consequences. An alternative
course of action (for those who owned them) was to fire up their diesel or
gasoline generators. Generator use, however, was often extremely problem-
atic. Generators burned non-renewable resources, were loud, smelled bad,
were costly to refuel, broke down easily, and required painstaking mainte-
nance. Generators also symbolized a painful defeat in the off-grid quest for
self-sufficiency.
    Distribution breakdowns are frictions occurring between the sites
of power generation and utilization. In the grid-connected world these
82                        Power Constellations
frictions are known as blackouts. Blackouts are “breaks in the flow of social
time”39 that manifest the vitality and agency of power constellations.40 In
the off-grid world, blackouts do not occur, but distribution frictions are
no less significant. Solar, wind, and micro-hydropower sources generate
direct current (DC) electricity, as opposed to the alternate current (AC)
that flows in common power lines. DC electricity must be inverted from
its source to AC electricity in order to operate most household appliances,
which work on the latter. Alternatively, off-gridders must endeavor to con-
vert these appliances to work on DC. Either option can be the source of
numerous problems.41
    Finally, utilization glitches occur at the moment of power consumption.
For example, light bulbs may burn out, blenders may stop working, and so
on. To some degree off-gridders experienced these problems as much as
the rest of us do in our everyday lives, but at other times these problems
occurred because of the idiosyncrasies of their systems, such as the needed
inversion from DC to AC. For example, older and less-expensive inverters
were unable to invert to pure sine wave current, and anything but a pure
conversion caused appliances to malfunction and even break down. The
preventive maintenance and routine repair occasioned by such frictions was
no insignificant matter in the off-grid lifeworld: maintenance and repair
“illustrate the importance of human labour and ingenuity,”42 and reveal the
different skills and bodies of knowledge43 existing within specific power
constellations.
    Electricity, of all forms of power, is “the central symbol of globalizing
modernity and its associated urban consumption styles.”44 Electricity’s arrival
in rural, remote, and developing places throughout the world continues to
have dramatic infrastructural, socio-cultural, and political repercussions.45
Indeed a great deal of our day-to-day lives revolves around electricity’s func-
tioning, including the continued flow of other resources. Take gasoline, for
example. Refueling a car with a credit card at a gas station relies on complex
systems like the construction and maintenance of roads and highways, the
global network of oil extraction and distribution, the international finance
organization that allows credit cards to work, and the communication net-
works that send monetary information around the globe,46 but also on the
very mundane operation of the electrical infrastructure that allows for fuel
to be pumped into a tank and the payment to be made through a credit card
reader. The point here is simple: power sources are interconnected with one
another. Power constellations, it follows, are also interconnected with other
power constellations.
    The ninth question then is: how do these interconnections work, and how
deeply? The off-grid power constellations we visited were characterized
                         Power Constellations                                83
by a more limited interconnectivity than we might expect from a modern,
Western home. Off-grid households, in fact, greatly emphasized the value
of independence, much more so than typical on-grid homes. Johanna and
Ron’s distance to the nearest town forced them to be more self-reliant
than most of us—something that was a source of satisfaction as well as
some inconvenience. But their distance from “society”—as Ron enjoyed
referring to the rest of the world—was not synonymous with isolation. So,
while the generation of electricity was a relatively independent pursuit for
them (save, of course, for “society’s” involvement in manufacturing wind
turbines and solar panels), the uses to which electricity was put were not.
By powering up their TV set and computer, and by generating electric-
ity to download a satellite internet signal, Ron and Johanna’s home was
enmeshed within global information and entertainment networks. Not
to mention that by advertising the sale of their home on the web, and by
investing in the stock market, even their family finances were intercon-
nected with the rest of society. Off-gridders—as our two years of travel
would reveal in the end—were never truly “off.” Their power constella-
tions were, though always in different ways, deeply interconnected with
many other assemblages.
   Finally, there is the tenth element: sensibility. Sensibility is the propen-
sity and ability to feel. It is the capacity to affect one’s environment and be
affected by it. Different power constellations feel different from one another.
To ask about the atmospheres of different power constellations and the sen-
sibilities of people living within them is therefore to ask about the different
senses of place, and how these different senses of place arise as a result of
various assemblages of power generation, distribution, and utilization.
   Off-grid places like Ron and Johanna’s felt dramatically different from
on-grid domestic environments. From the quiet and the darkness of their
environments, to the unique sounds and textures of their abodes, off-grid
power constellations gave rise to different sensations to both full-time
inhabitants and occasional visitors like us. Different power constellations
are characterized by sharply unique atmospheres, and such different atmo-
spheres draw different people with different inclinations, skills, and values—
and different ideas of what constitutes a good life.
   To ask about the different sensibilities of power constellations and of
their dwellers is therefore to ask questions about the geographies and soci-
ology of power and of lifestyle. It requires being sensitive to the sights,
sounds, aromas, flavors, textures, temperatures, and fluctuations of a place.
It demands thinking carefully about the many ways in which power affects
an atmosphere: from the presence of a candle lighting a room or a ringing
phone, to the availability of heat and clean water.
84                        Power Constellations
     And, of course, different sensibilities exist in different environments.
Whereas some off-gridders, for example, felt adamant about not using stinky
and noisy generators, others were less offended by their operation. Even within
a relatively coherent power constellation, such as the off-grid one, many dif-
ferences existed along the elements we have described in these pages.
                                      ***
Kyle deposited us back onto terra firma safely once again, three days after
we had departed. We de-iced our truck’s windshield and set our sights for
Prince Albert, where we consumed a hurried deli sandwich lunch in the
Real Canadian Superstore’s parking lot. We then slogged on to Saskatoon
through nearly whiteout conditions and waited in the city for our flight
back home. Eerily, Saskatoon felt like a glitzy megalopolis with all its traffic
lights, cars, people, and KFC franchises. The shock of coming back to the
“real world” after only even a few days off-grid was always a destabilizing—
and yet strangely re-energizing—one.
     But this one was notably less invigorating. Besides Ron and Johanna,
we had interviewed four other off-gridders in the province and had braved
more sub-zero temperature days in one week than we had experienced in
the last five years on our warm and cozy coast. We were homesick, fed up
with snow, and exhausted. And our budget had taken a sizeable hit. There
was no doubt we’d have to make a few cuts on the road ahead. Skipping
provinces was no option, of course. We had our minds and hearts set on
proudly reaching Newfoundland as the thirteenth and last trip, and noth-
ing would change that, even if that meant no cuisine other than “parking lot
specials” and no accommodations other than camping for the rest of the way.
     “Actually,” I quipped as we rushed to return our truck earlier than sched-
uled to save on car rental money, “maybe we could camp somewhere and
save. Like, in Newfoundland. Summers are warm there, right?”
     “Yeah, why not?” Jon replied. “Maybe we can camp in Nunavut too.
Global warming has probably already turned Baffin Island into a tropical
paradise anyway.”
     “Camping in Nunavut, that’s an idea . . .”


6 Comfort

      “I would rather sit on a pumpkin and have it all to myself, than be crowded
      on a velvet cushion.”
      “To affect the quality of the day, that is the highest of arts.”
                                                     Henry David Thoreau, in Walden
Groovy Yurts
The Canadian Shield looks nothing like the Mongolian tundra except,
curiously, for one common feature: the presence of yurts. A yurt is a por-
table quasi-conical dwelling framed in wood, covered by layers of fabric and
other insulating material, and held together by ropes. Traditionally used by
nomadic peoples of Central Asia, authentic yurts are now widely distrib-
uted in Canada by an enterprising Quebec company, Groovy Yurts,ii which
markets them as a cool alternative to small cottages, annex buildings, art and
yoga studios, and even standard homes.
      Now, if you’ve never lived in a yurt and decide to move into one, you’ll
find that two of its most distinctive architectural characteristics will require
a good deal of adaptation. The first is lack of privacy—a result of the absence
of doors and rooms inside them. The second is limited light—a conse-
quence of the absence of windows. There is generally only one skylightiii
ii.
iii.
                                               87
88                                       Comfort
in these structures—an opening that casts natural luminosity straight down
from the ceiling.
      Stuartiv stood up from his bed, tossed on his winter coat, and laced up his
boots. As he did so, I took another glance at the glow and shadows cast by
his off-grid yurt’s skylight. It was a radiant spring morning and the snowy
meadow around us reflected the glare from the sun brightly into the air. Even
on an overcast day there would have been enough natural light inside—at
least during the daytime—to read, cook, or do domestic chores, but the com-
parative contrast with the amount and type of artificial lighting ideal for a
Martha Stewart-like home was still sharp. Many houses nowadays tend to be
furnished with task-specific lighting so that different areas feature tools for
differing brightness (e.g., neon, iridescent bulbs, compact fluorescent bulbs,
windows), different illumination angles (e.g., ceiling-mounted, wall-mounted,
table-top), and different intensities and textures of brilliance (e.g., bright, dim,
cold, warm).1 Here there was only one source of weather-dependent natural
light, and one artificial source of light powered by a gasoline generator.
      “I’ll get solar panels soon, maybe next year,” Stuart observed wistfully as he
led the way outside, “they’re pretty expensive.” But in the meantime he was
perfectly snug—comfort was something he did not seem to lack at all. Com-
fort, in fact, is not a uniform or objective experience. It is something that can
be achieved differently: in variable intensities and with different technologies.
      We had met Stuart the night before at a nice house dinner kindly orga-
nized by our hosts at Nature’s Harmony off-grid Eco-lodge,v three hours
northeast of Ottawa. The province of Ontario is separated from Saskatch-
ewan by a 649,950 km2 land mass called Manitoba, a province which should
have rightly occupied the sixth chapter slot in this book. We did not forget
about Manitoba. But as it happened we badly needed to save money, and
when I received an invitation to fly to Ottawa on someone else’s dime, I
thought of taking advantage of the airfare savings and decided to extend
the trip afterward to try and get back on track with the budget. So, after
my downtown meeting wrapped up, I rented a rugged Subaru Outback,
swung by the airport to pick up Jon, and set the GPS for where the power
lines ended. Over the next seven days we would interview a record 22 off-
gridders at 14 different sites over a 2,000 km insanely long, triangle-shaped
itinerary roughly connecting the North Bay area, Orangeville to the south-
west, and our nation’s capital to the east.
      Though Nature’s Harmony’s choice of accommodations also included a
yurt, we had elected to stay at a secluded wooden cabin that could only be
reached via a 15-minute snowshoe trek through the forest. There was no
iv.
v.
                                 Comfort                                     89
running water but, more usefully, two solar panels sitting on the cabin’s roof-
powered sockets (always a necessity when doing battery-powered fieldwork),
and a handful of interior lights. However, the weather had been sour lately
and our charge display indicated we were critically low on stored amperage.
Without a generator, Jon and I respected priorities and directed the little
electricity available to refueling our laptops, recorders, and cameras. Our
eyes would just have to manage with fewer lumens of artificial light. Back
home it would have been common for either of us to turn on multiple lights
in a room, but here there was no possibility for a visual splurge at this time.
A 25-watt kitchen light bulb had to be enough for illuminating an impro-
vised meal, and another incandescent bulb provided sufficient luminosity
for reading our respective books in the living room.
   The limited availability of light turned out to teach me something
remarkable. For the first few minutes reading required a bit of squinting,
but then my sense of sight learned to ease into the dimmer conditions. In
a darker room it was actually easier to read because my eyes were less dis-
tracted by other things, and because the slower pace of my reading allowed
me to concentrate better. It seemed like my eyes simply managed to do with
whatever little light they had. Comfort, it dawned on me, is something we
can work on, something we can practice and get used to. All it takes is a little
effort to find contentment in whatever little we have.
   Though short stays at idyllic cabins like the one at Nature’s Harmony
were ideal to learn a few hands-on lessons like these, such accommodations
did not always make the most logistical sense. This is because they required
us to drive off to each interview site in the morning and then retrace our
steps to our cabin at night. An easier alternative would have entailed thread-
ing a more continuous forward-pushing path between interviews and sleep-
ing at more conveniently located hotels along the way. But since at cabins we
could also cook for ourselves and thus save money on restaurant bills, there
was really no choice. Though the participant observation was infinitesimally
more rewarding, the added domestic responsibilities and road driving (not
to mention the additional stretches of snowshoeing, canoeing, snowmobil-
ing, or simply digging ourselves out from the bushes surrounding our rental
cabins) was taking an obvious toll on us.
   Case in point: on the eve of our departure from Nature’s Harmony, tem-
peratures suddenly rose and proceeded to turn snow into ponds of slush
and cold water. Then overnight the winds picked up and dragged in snowy
clouds from the north, which swiftly dumped 10 centimeters of fresh white
stuff as we slept. When we went to pack our car in the morning in –15°C
(5°F) weather we noticed that the tires had frozen into the ground—or
more precisely in what had been deep slush when we parked, and what
had then unexpectedly turned into solid ice. We eventually succeeded in
90                                       Comfort
chiseling the wheels out of the ice with well-aimed kicks and stomps but
afterward we had to endure driving on semi-square tires, rendered partly
flat-sided by the protracted contact with the ground.
     Fortunately the rubber warmed up and evened out, as temperatures reached
15°C (59°F) in a matter of a few hours and a few hundred kilometers. By the
time we reached Glen and Joanne’s home we were in our T-shirts.vi Joanne
and Glen used to live in the city but had eventually grown to hate it. So, a few
years before, they had decided to seek the comfort of a rural acreage. The deci-
sion to live off-grid came after they found out their ideal property was too far
from the nearest power pole. They determined that investing in self-sufficiency
rather than monthly bills made sense and resolved to build the house on their
own in such a way as to take maximum advantage of passive solar energy. The
building was long on its east-to-west axis and very narrow south-to-north.
Large south-facing windows let in copious amounts of heat and light.
     It took Glen and Joanne and their two young boys some time to become
accustomed to the darkness after they left downtown Toronto and moved
to their stylish 2,500 ft2 straw bale home. Neither of them had ever lived
without the light pollution of the city. “We couldn’t believe how black it was
in the house,” Glen remembered about the first winter. “If it was a cloudy
night, you couldn’t see in front of your face.”
     One of the solutions they decided to implement in order to increase
their visual comfort was installing self-assembled 1-watt LEDs (Light-
Emitting Diodes). “You couldn’t buy lights like these anywhere at the
time,” Glen recounted, “so I bought the acrylic plastic parts and made them
myself.” The idea worked so well and consumed so little energy that Glen
also put together another three over the dining table for a hip-looking
3-watt fixture. A few other lights around the house, all compact fluores-
cents, served as task lighting (e.g., for closets, bathroom, control room),
but they were turned on infrequently because the most lived-in areas were
bathed in ample natural light. “In the summer time we don’t turn lights on,
at all,” Glen revealed. “With this massive bank of glass here we get all the
light we need during the day, and even after the sun goes down at 9:30 you
can still walk around the house till 10 or 10:30,” he explained, “and we’re
generally in bed by then anyway.”
Lighting the Way, on a Bike
There are at least two different kinds of comfort: emotional and physical.
Physical comfort is what interests us here. We can understand it as an evalu-
ative judgment of the ease, enjoyableness, or pleasantness of one’s sensual
vi.
                                  Comfort                                      91
experience of something. The word comfortable, however, can also be attrib-
uted to insensitive things, like furniture or train seats. In that sense, comfort-
able is a quality attributed to material objects in regard to whether they can
provide that pleasant sensory experience to us. This is why it is correct to
say, “I feel comfortable in this house,” as well as, “this house is comfortable.”
   Certain minimum “standards” of comfort are necessary for human sur-
vival, as extreme discomfort can cause unbearable suffering. It would be
impossible, for example, to live exposed in temperatures that cause hypo-
thermia. Dwelling in constant impenetrable darkness would also be very
uncomfortable and would eventually lead to physical pain and death (as
one would be unable to find the resources needed for survival). Just like air,
light is a primary medium of human existence.2 Yet, the range of conditions
within which humans can achieve comfort is extremely wide. As Wilhite
and colleagues3 have shown in the context of the different lighting tech-
niques used in Norwegian and Japanese homes, deeply set cultural charac-
teristics shape different notions of domestic comfort.
   Comfort is in fact not a universally objective condition. Historically
and culturally variable definitions of comfort,4 as well as changing archi-
tectural and scientific practices that engineer it and even medicalize it,5
reflect directly on what people will consider comfortable. As a result, in
our consumer culture comfort is a prized feature used to market anything
from couches to air conditioning systems. Comfort is especially important
within the modern, Western home.6 Together with ideals of cleanliness and
convenience, notions of comfort inform how we value our dwellings and
relate to them.7
   Comfort enters the domestic experience in many different ways. We
could talk of thermal comfort, the comfort provided by furniture, and much
more. What we want to do now is focus on visual comfort: the comfort pro-
vided by light. Domestic visual comfort—that is, the evaluative judgment
of the experience of lighting within a home—has been subject to a growing
amount of research lately.8 Our intent is to understand how visual comfort
can be achieved—through what tools and strategies—and to reflect on the
significance of different practices of achieving it. Though we focus on visual
comfort, it is easy to extrapolate our ideas to other kinds of comfort.
   We can understand visual comfort as an embodied affective sensibility:9 a
susceptibility to be affected by, or the capacity to affect, the visual charac-
teristics of one’s environment. Visual comfort can further be understood
as a three-dimensional set of bodily capacities and intensities of feeling.10
The first dimension is an “aesthetic sensibility”11: a judgment that unfolds
through the sensing eyes. The second dimension is an “objective capacity”12:
the quality imputed to an object, such as a light source, to provide visual
comfort. Third, visual comfort is an “anticipatory affective resonance”13:
92                                  Comfort
something that is not felt as the outcome of an immediate interaction with
an object, but rather anticipated, predicted, estimated. Intended this way,
comfort “clearly depends on the capabilities and capacities of individual
bodies themselves”14 and is therefore contingent on people’s manipulative
and transformative activities.
   Visual comfort is an achievement in the sense that it is something people
seek in order to feel good about the amount, source, and type of light in
which they live. Visual comfort is therefore an affective register,15 that is, as
a bodily capacity to affect lighting and be affected by it. This capacity varies
along with differing power constellations, obviously, but also in relation to
different cultural and lifestyle-specific notions of what constitutes comfort.
These variations give rise to what we might call ways of lighting.
   Like the ways of heating we talked about in chapter 3, different ways of
lighting weave together relations between humans and non-humans (e.g.,
resources, technologies), thus comprising different assemblages of knowl-
edge, skills, materials, features of places, and so on. Ways of lighting are indi-
vidual and collective visual accomplishments shaped by habits, dispositions,
and lifestyles. Differently lit environments therefore exist as different “task-
scapes”16 in which people become differently involved in search of varying
intensities of visual comfort afforded by different means and required for
different ends.
   Historically, the arrival of light and power into the modern home had a
revolutionary effect on notions of domesticity and comfort.17 Because cur-
rent mainstream ideas of domestic comfort are so deeply imbricated with
the consumer ideologies that the arrival of electricity brought on, it would
seem logical to expect that homeowners who do not rely on large-scale
assemblages like grid-transmitted electricity are somehow at a disadvan-
tage in their capacity to configure the comfort of their homes. Off-gridders
showed us instead that it was possible to create comfortable spaces through
alternative assemblages. The key to achieving various intensities and differ-
ent kinds of visual comfort resided in off-gridders’ capacity to re-assemble
the socio-technical system by which comfort was affected.
   Take for instance the issue of wiring a house with 12-volt DC electricity.
For those of us living on the grid this would be inconvenient and inefficient
because power lines carry higher-voltage AC electricity, which travels better
over long distances. DC electricity—such as that generated by solar panels
and stored in batteries—instead works better when it doesn’t need to travel
far. Off-gridders who had chosen to stick with 12-volt wiring without the
use of an AC inverter enjoyed several energy efficiencies. But their choice
also required some adjustments. In the context of lighting, for example,
12-volt systems typically worked better with low-wattage lighting such as
                                    Comfort                                   93
LEDs. LED lights are sources of illumination that not everyone finds visu-
ally comfortable, as they are often perceived to feel “cold” and to cast light
too narrowly. The point of this example, however, is poignant: the fact that
some off-gridders did find this type of lighting comfortable, and the fact
that this type of lighting saved considerable amounts of energy in those
homes, tells us that by actively working on what we perceive to be comfort-
able we can change what comfort means and what it can cost.
                                        ***
Throughout the two years of fieldwork we never bothered to record demo-
graphic data because we knew that our sample could never be representa-
tive of the broader off-grid population for one simple reason: no one could
find out who all the off-gridders out there were. Too many of them simply
couldn’t—and didn’t want to—be found, so why even bother guessing about
their composition? This didn’t stop us from noticing common characteris-
tics of the roughly 200 we met, though. Most of them lived together with
a partner, for example, and sometimes had children in the house too. Fewer
lived alone. And even fewer of those who lived alone were women. So, when
Susan invited us to visit her place we were particularly enthusiastic. Men
often took a conventionally masculine role within off-grid households, as
the division of labor found in households like Ron and Johanna’s back in
Saskatchewan revealed. This is not to say that women were disinterested in
wiring, plumbing, carpentry, and all that. Actually, many of them took an
active role in house design, building, and maintenance. Susan was one of
those women.
    “Check it out,” she announced proudly as she led the way upstairs to
show us what she had led us to anticipate in an email. “Isn’t that cool? And
it’s really simple. You just plug it in and start biking.”
    I had never seen a generator bike, except in cartoons.
    “Do you want to see a demo?”
    As Susan began to pedal, the small display mounted on the handlebar
lit up and indicated how much power she produced with each push. Susan
smiled as she pedaled on to the tune of the wheels’ soft whir, knowing that
her physical exercise was ingeniously good for her body and her house.
    “It’s the beauty of 12-volt electricity,” Susan remarked, sensing my amaze-
ment. “You can use it to get power out or put it in.” By “in” she referred to her
batteries, which thanks to her short stationary jaunt were now a tad closer
to being topped off. During the cold weeks of the Ontario fall and winter—
when going out for a walk was as pleasant as a freezing-cold shower—Susan
would occasionally take a break from writing and generate a few amps.
94                                 Comfort
    Her batteries could use the extra juice too. Compared to other off-grid
set-ups, her system was miniscule, just enough for her basic needs as the
sole inhabitant of her home. The small solar panel array—with no wind
turbine or micro-hydro waterwheel to supplement the photovoltaic energy
output—was pretty much all she needed to generate enough electricity for
her domestic comfort. A diesel generator stood by in case of additional
need, but Susan limited its use as much as she could. This may sound like
an uncomfortable way of living, but “it’s easier and cheaper,” she explained
in a gentle, assured tone as we calmly drank a cup of tea in her kitchen. “It
makes perfect sense for me to live like this,” she reflected. With little money
to her name just a few years before, she had managed to secure a no-interest
mortgage and bought the 7 1/2-acre property from an old friend. She began
settling in by clearing space for the driveway, and then bit by bit cleared the
rest of the site and assembled her home.
    Susan had limited material desires, but one of those was to not sacrifice
on visual comfort. “I did not want to live in darkness,” she said with a smile.
As a result, a great deal of attention went into making space for windows
and other smaller fixed openings to let light in. Log homes can be quite
dark, as the color of the wood reflects light more poorly than the white-
painted drywall typical of most homes. On the other hand, it’s easy to cut
window frames in log homes. So, Susan patiently managed to find and then
fit a mix-and-match set of windows. These included an especially nice and
large one that gave her a serene, pastoral view over the surrounding hills.
Initially “I was really concerned about light,” Susan confided, but she was
quite content with her solutions now.
    These solutions included another technology likely to startle the urban
dweller: propane lights. Propane lights are turned on by striking a match
and turning open an adjustable gas shutter, not unlike one would do to light
up a barbeque grill. A light-colored coating called a mantle—a socket-like
ceramic mesh that encases the flame—is fitted over the gas-line opening.
The flame actually escapes the mantle when the light is ignited, but then
the trick is to turn the shutter down a bit to reduce the flame. After that
phase propane light works just like electric light and is similar in color and
brightness. The only difference is in its sound; while low in volume there
is a definite hiss that is typical of propane lights. Also different, of course,
is their portability. Typically, propane lights need to be part of fixtures and
cannot be moved around the home like lamps. Kerosene lamps or candles
can achieve that mobility, but they are vastly inferior in efficiency, cost,
externality, and comfort value compared to portable LED lights.
    Comfort, according to historian John Crowley,18 took on its modern
meaning of sensual satisfaction with commercial “domestic enhancements
that provided more privacy, cleanliness, warmth, and light” only in recent
                                   Comfort                                  95
times. Previously, the idea of comfort only denoted the emotional, spiritual,
and moral worth of personal support. It was only later, after consumerism
took hold, that the modern denotation of comfort as material contentment
displaced its original reference. Comfort, in the words of Shove,19 was thus
progressively “normalized” within consumer society and “represented as a
normal . . . and even natural state of affairs.”
   The normalization of comfort is the result of an assemblage of objects,
representations, practices, and experiences championed by manufacturers
and marketers of domestic goods and by affiliated technical experts. With
regard to lighting, biological and physiological research has combined with
the technical applications of engineers and architects to “determine opti-
mal conditions in order to produce and provide what people need.”20 As
sociologist Wiebe Bijker21 has documented through his study of the evolu-
tion of the light bulb, these assemblages of actors, stakeholders, consumers,
technologies, resources, ideals, norms, values, and practices have resulted in
shaping “combinations of lighting intensity and color that are experienced
as comfortable”22 and seemingly normal and natural. Visual comfort, in a
nutshell, is malleable, yet it is often perceived by most of us as natural and
fixed, as if an optimal standard could be positively measured, assessed, and
uniformly agreed upon.
   Off-gridders’ ways of lighting illustrated in vivid detail the malleability
of domestic visual comfort and how it could be achieved differently. The
distinguishing characteristic of their quest for comfort resided in how pro-
foundly they participated in making their own domestic comfort possible
through their relative independence from utility providers. By becoming
involved in the design and building of their homes and in the generation of
power and light, they meaningfully re-assembled the ways in which com-
fort, technology, domestic environments, consumer objects, and notions of
modern lifestyle were entangled.
   Off-grid lighting tactics were bricolages through which off-gridders
derived great “pleasure in getting around the rules”23 of the mainstream—the
rules that constrained ways of designing homes and generating, distributing,
and consuming power (like building and electrical codes). By incorporat-
ing comfort into their everyday life on their own terms, by “press[ing] into
service” objects and resources around them “to suit [their] current purposes,
[they] proceed[ed] to modify those things to [their] own design so that they
better serve[d] those purposes”24 rather than those assembled “by the law of
a foreign power.”25
   When comfort is re-assembled in this fashion and taken away from
the sovereign domain of automated, centralized, mechanical control, its
experience radically changes. When inhabitants of buildings (rather than
mere occupants) take an active role in controlling the performance of their
96                                Comfort
dwellings, their experience of comfort becomes more dynamic, adaptive, and
sensitive to the unique features of their interaction with the local environ-
ment and material world.26
The Thoreau Effect
Off-gridders’ visual comfort emerged not only from their involvement in the
generation of indoor lighting, but also from their orientation toward light
itself. We thought we’d call this phenomenon the Thoreau Effect. By the
Thoreau Effect we refer to a transformation in a person’s orientation toward
his/her capacity to affect comfort and be affected by material objects’ capac-
ity for comfort. In few and simple words, the Thoreau Effect captures a basic
adaptive process: the process of learning to enjoy the comfort of something
that requires a great deal of personal effort. It is inspired by the concept of
the Diderot Effect.
    The Diderot Effect is a well-known phenomenon in the study of con-
sumption. Simply put, it refers to a process of upward-spiraling consumption
sparked by the dissatisfaction with old possessions generated by acquisition
of new goods.27 The expression comes from a story related by the philoso-
pher Denis Diderot, who detailed how the purchase of a new and beautiful
scarlet dressing gown made it increasingly difficult and eventually impos-
sible for him to appreciate his old clothes, which in contrast to the new item
began to feel inelegant.
    The Diderot Effect can explain the collective historical escalation of the
quest for visual comfort as well.28 This escalation is characterized by a quest
for “better” and brighter light: that is, lighting that is more sensitive to the
specificities of various domestic needs and wants. This escalation is marked
by a series of dissatisfactions with older lighting tools and techniques that
were made suddenly obsolete by newly introduced technologies. In virtue of
this effect we can understand visual comfort as something that changes with
new anticipatory affective resonances made possible by innovations in light-
ing technologies. In other words, within a consumer culture, increases in the
capacity of objects to produce comfort tend to generate higher and higher
thresholds for people’s experience of comfort. Or, to put it in even simpler
terms: the more technologies “improve,” the more we seem to become dis-
satisfied with what we used to find perfectly adequate before.
    Take indoor light, for example. Domestic lighting has witnessed a remark-
able ratcheting up of expectations over the last two centuries. In ancient
times fire, besides natural sunlight, was the main source of domestic light.
But the light coming from the fire burning in open hearths was also a source
of discomfort. Hearth fires caused indoor smoke, which required ventila-
tion. Ventilation invited in moisture and cold air, as doors and uncovered
                                 Comfort                                    97
wall openings were the only options for air circulation. Newer domestic
lighting solutions were then sought and soon the invention of glazed glass
windows introduced a new level of domestic comfort. This seemed perfectly
fine until candles were introduced and eventually made fire inadequate as a
lighting technology.
    The quest for visual comfort continued to escalate as candle technology
was continuously refined. Newer self-burning wicks made earlier candle-
wicks—which needed to be manually trimmed every few minutes—seem
inconvenient and obsolete. Then, newer, lighter, portable oil lamps pushed
away older, cumbersome candlesticks. Candlesticks were originally made of
solid iron and brass and felt heavy in comparison to oil lamps.29 But when
gas lighting was developed, portable oil lamps quickly fell out of favor.
    After the wonderful comforts afforded by gas lighting were introduced,
people felt that earlier domestic lighting options paled in comparison. Gas
lighting seemed so good that earlier technologies—such as oil lamps and
tallow candles—suddenly started to feel sooty and smell bad in comparison.
Moreover, oil lamps required constant refilling and tallow candles congealed
easily in cold environments and melted quickly in warm ones; whereas gas
flowed automatically and worked well in all conditions. But it didn’t end
there. Electric light soon arrived.
    The successive domestication of electric lighting did to gas what gas had
done to candles. Electric light made gas lighting appear to be rife with prob-
lems, as gas lighting was—amongst other troubles—recognized to make
breathing difficult and to cause headaches and various respiratory ailments.
Escalation did not end there either as, later on, the light bulb itself became
subject to a great deal of troubleshooting. Interior electric lighting became
the domain of experts who made it their goal to improve visual comfort
by optimizing task-specific and room-specific illumination, while seeking
energy-conservation solutions and fashionable elegance at the same time.30
Greater and greater intensities of visual comfort, in sum, became progres-
sively normalized31 as the threshold of consumer expectations got higher
and higher.
    If the Diderot Effect works somewhat like an addictive search for greater
doses of comfort obtained through decreasing effort and inconvenience, the
Thoreau Effect works by way of reversing that trend. It is a phenomenon
marked by contentment, rather than perennial dissatisfaction, with the
affective capacity for comfort from whatever one already has. It is also a
sensibility to appreciate what you can accomplish by yourself: a sensibility to
find greater value in whatever you are able to assemble on your own rather
than in whatever the market can provide.
    The Thoreau Effect gets its name from the experiences of the most
renowned “off-gridder” of all time, Henry David Thoreau. In On Walden
98                                Comfort
Pond, Thoreau described how he spent two years in a small cabin in the
woods not too far from Concord, Massachusetts, where he deprived himself
of many of the comforts of the city. Instead of being painful, the Spartan
lifestyle taught Thoreau to draw contentment from the few “simple things”
he had. Thoreau also learned to draw great comfort and pride from the
fruits of his own labor. It is the combination of these two processes that
makes up the Thoreau Effect. First: a heightened sensibility to find great
comfort in objects that many other people would find inadequate, obsolete,
cumbersome, inferior, inconvenient, and uncomfortable. Second: a higher
appreciation for comfort obtained through hard work and direct physical
involvement, especially when practiced in relative autonomy from others.
    Domestic visual comfort—which we might now better define as the sense
of contentment with the source, amount, intensity, color, and feel of light
available in a home—sounds like a pretty superficial thing to worry about.
Yet, variations in levels of visual comfort teach us important lessons about
comfort in general. To affect the quality of the day by becoming involved
in something as important as light generation is one of the “highest arts”
of contemporary everyday life, to borrow from Thoreau. That sense of self-
reliance and involvement into the provision of the resources needed for their
lifestyle deeply infused off-gridders’ orientation to domestic comfort and
allowed them to find contentment in the lighting systems they assembled,
as well as in the many other technologies they employed to make their lives
comfortable and convenient.
    The Thoreau Effect is the process whereby comfort is felt, anticipated,
and imbued into technologies that—like propane lights, low-wattage bulbs,
dim environments, or DC electricity—are not the latest, most advanced,
and most fashionable. It is a process by which comfort is felt, anticipated,
and imbued into objects not by virtue of these objects’ market value, inno-
vativeness, or contemporariness, but rather by virtue of one’s ability to affect
the immediate environment through active participation,32 through relative
independence from others, and the capacity to do with less.33
    The Thoreau Effect does not describe a state of disinterest in greater
intensities of comfort. After all there was hardly any asceticism going
on among off-gridders—quite the opposite indeed. Rather, the Thoreau
Effect describes how the anticipation of future intensities and future kinds
of comfort does not necessarily have to come at the expense of the cur-
rent experience of comfort. Knowing that you can have a more comfortable
home tomorrow, in other words, does not have to make you unhappy with
what you have today. This orientation runs contrary to the typical feeling of
“lack” on which consumerist desire for greater comfort hinges. The Thoreau
Effect, in fact, describes how comfort becomes less subject to escalation
whenever great personal effort is required for its generation. After all, it
                                         Comfort                                   99
makes sense to find comfort in what you already have if you are aware of
the personal costs and consequences of alternative kinds and intensities of
comfort. The off-grid lifestyle constantly taught its practitioners this simple
but important lesson: be happy with what you have, because getting more
brings complications, toil, and all sorts of trouble.
                                              ***
Driving thousands of kilometers had some advantages. Methodologically, it
gave us a chance to discuss interviews and reflect on new lessons and experi-
ences as they presented themselves and while they were still raw and fresh.
And from a more personal perspective it gave us both a chance to see the
country, which was constantly proving to be larger than we had ever imag-
ined. Ontario’s size and beauty were especially surprising. As a West Coaster
I had always thought of Ontario in the form of busy eight-lane highways,
industrial complexes, and bustling cities, but once away from urban and sub-
urban cement the land continuously shone with verdant evergreens, shapely
ridges, and myriad lakes that begged to be paddled on. Much of our triangu-
lar itinerary paralleled access points into the wilderness of Algonquin Park,
whose logo prominently appeared on Murray’s green T-shirt.
      Murray and Naan’svii bookshelves were filled with books on canoe-
ing, camping, outdoor travel, and wilderness skills as well as with socially
conscious contemporary non-fiction. While Murray sat on the couch for a
moment—posing under the light with a book for Jon to record some addi-
tional video—Naan told me how lighting worked in their reading room.
Besides basic reduction—they each had one light near a favorite armchair—
their secret to reducing wattage was twofold.
      First, they cast light only where needed, without wasting it elsewhere. Their
portable and adjustable “Air Canada” tabletop lights—that’s the nickname
they had given their 3 1/2-watt LED lights—worked just like the reading
lights found on Boeing and Airbus cabins. The spread of their luminosity was
limited, but their rays were perfect when aimed directly where needed.
      Their second secret was to utilize DC lighting instead of AC. Naan and
Murray had both AC and DC lights, but the former had been a significant
source of trouble and were being gradually phased out from their house.
“The DC LEDs are much more efficient,” Naan observed. “AC LEDs are
also available on the market but the sine wave on our inverter is too irregular
for AC lighting. We almost started a fire once.” And while they felt “colder”
because of their blue brightness, DC LED lights were also easier on their
ageing eyes, Naan found.
vii.
100                                       Comfort
       As mentioned before, solar panels produce DC (Direct Current) electric-
ity. Direct current electricity consists of electrons flowing in a single direc-
tion. However, the type of electricity provided to grid-connected homes
is AC (Alternating Current), which flows back and forth at 60 cycles per
second (60 hertz), thus much more rapidly than DC. As a result, lighting,
appliances, and almost everything else runs on AC on the basis of 120 or
240 volts. Off-grid homes therefore need inverters that convert DC electric-
ity into AC and change voltage from 12 to the needed 120 or 240 volts. This
conversion can be more or less pure. The purer output is known as sine wave,
whereas modified sine wave is a less pure and more irregular form.
       Not all modern appliances and lights are capable of running on modified
sine wave, and attempting to operate them—if they can start at all—can
cause damage. As well, inverters need energy to operate. Most off-grid sys-
tems are sizeable enough to afford feeding energy to an inverter, but some
are so small that any amount of saving can make a great difference. Murray
and Naan’s system, solely dependent on solar and producing only up to one
kilowatt, was one such small system. By using DC instead of AC lights, they
could bypass their inverter and save about 10% of their power.
       Naan and Murray were off-the-grid for environmental reasons. While
they recognized that off-grid living was not a solution to global energy
security, they believed that relative self-sufficiency and reduced reliance on
non-renewables could teach us all a lot about conservation. Their philoso-
phy also went a long way toward explaining their extremely thrifty use of
their backup propane generator. “The game is to use it as little as possible,”
observed Murray,viii “some years we manage to never turn it on at all.” That
was one impressive feat with a one-kilowatt solar system.
       Off-grid living was not easy, definitely not as easy as plugging in a toaster
and letting a distant dam generate enough electricity for our breakfast. But
through active involvement in renewable energy utilization, through the
feeling of satisfaction obtained by reducing personal needs, and through
the sense of fulfillment inherent in making do with self-provision, Naan
and Murray—as well as many other off-gridders—were able to find great
comfort in their home.
       We thanked Murray and Naan for their time, feeding us lunch, opening
their home to us, and the inspiring conversation, then once again drove on.
“The visuals from this interviewix are going to be great,” Jon cheered as we
merged onto the main country road. Given his self-critical and perfection-
ist tendencies, it was always a good thing when he said that. Producing an
viii.
ix.
                                     Comfort                                    101
ethnographic documentary is such a complex undertaking. Besides ensur-
ing that all the important conceptual themes are covered by the editing,
the selection of empirical material for visual presentation has to take into
account light, sound, and a host of other aesthetic variables. And you can
never have enough action shots and B-roll. Making a film for the first time
was teaching me more about fieldwork than I had learned in years. Writing,
for example, allows an author to create scenes, but the medium of film isn’t
so flexible. With film you can only tell a story you actually have footage
for—because you can’t re-create it like you can with written words. So, as I
steered the wheel of every one of our rentals, Jon would be constantly on the
lookout for interesting details of the landscapes passing by.
   In addition to the B-roll of pretty bucolic scenes, Ontario gave us views
of acres of solar panel arrays everywhere we turned: the outcome of a provin-
cial energy policy that had intelligently subsidized household power genera-
tion. Selling solar electricity to the grid was a smart investment that many
on-grid farmers, especially, had taken up to supplement their income.
   “What do you make of all these solar panels?” Jon asked me as he put the
camera down for a moment.
   I had been ruminating about this for a while, but always in rather inco-
herent and incomplete patterns until, somehow, the glib answer my instincts
spoke precipitated a deeper sense of clarity.
   “Seems a bit less selfish than the off-grid way, doesn’t it?”
   “What do you mean?” Jon replied.
   “I don’t know for sure, but I’ve had a nagging question bugging me for a
while. Isn’t it a bit selfish to live off-the-grid?”
   “You mean, like how every off-gridder looks after their own little world?”
   “Yeah,” I mumbled as I re-adjusted my body on the driver’s seat, suddenly
feeling uncomfortable in my own skin. “I mean, generating clean power and
selling it back to the grid would be a very good thing in places where grid
electricity is still generated with coal, nuclear, and all that.”
   “But off-gridders normally can’t do that because they’re too far from the
grid,” Jon observed.
   “I know but . . . ,” I hesitated to say what I thought.
   “What?”
   “I mean, I shouldn’t even say this because I live pretty far too, but do you
think it’s right, from an environmental angle, to live so far from the rest of soci-
ety? Wouldn’t it make more sense to concentrate populations in highly dense
areas like so many geographers suggest34 and then pool together our resources,
without living in these separate, polarized little enclaves of our own?”
   Jon had no immediate answer, and neither did I. But I had just poked
a hole the size of Algonquin Park in my entire perspective on the off-grid
102                                    Comfort
lifestyle. Until then I had never really entertained these issues at a level
higher than rumblings, but venting out like that had instantly scarred my
enthusiasm for off-grid living. Maybe that was the reason why I didn’t live
off-grid in the first place. Or maybe I was just rationalizing—making up
glamorous excuses for my obvious inability to take care of myself and my
own house. Or maybe I was just tired and cranky. Actually, I knew for a fact
I was. We had stopped for a lukewarm, sub-par coffee in Huntsville, and the
unrewarding caffeine shot, the uncooperative Wi-Fi signal, the endless calls
and emails to return, and a few awful local drivers had profoundly exacer-
bated the fatigue from the interview marathon we were racing.
     We peeled off quickly, but once again the snow started to make our travel
miserable. I needed to get off the road. I needed a warm shower too—it had
been days since the last one and I confessed to Jon I was starting to look
forward to staying at a hotel in Orangeville. I asked him if he could Google
a Best Western or a Holiday Inn or some “no surprises” hotel chain where
we could get a choice in pillow firmness. He found one right away and made
a reservation with his phone. “Not the most off-grid stay,” he noted wryly,
“but I could use a non-weather-dependent hot shower too. Maybe there’s
also a sushi place in town; let me look that up.”
     “Nice, I really need that,” I sighed, and sped up west toward Highway 9
and Orangeville.


7 Convenience

“Geographical center of Canada,” read a momentous sign posted alongside
the Trans-Canada Highway near the town of Landmark, 30 clicks south-
east of Winnipeg.i “It’s official,” I exclaimed, “we’ve made it to the half-way
point!” As the summer sun shone assuredly in the still prairie sky, icy roads,
budget crunches, and manic interview schedules quickly receded in the rear-
view mirror, and for all that I caught myself breathing a sigh of relief.
      “Wanna stop somewhere really quickly to celebrate?” I asked Jon.
      “Sure. But do you really think you can find an iced latte worthy of the
occasion around here?”
      I didn’t. We pulled over a long while later, surrendering to the half-
hearted enticement of a non-descript gas station mart.
      Manitoba was pleasant. Though it was inimical toward gradients—as
popular lore rightly had it—its landscape was calm and serene.ii The people
acted as friendly as their license plate motto (“Friendly Manitoba”) prom-
ised them to be. And the fauna was amicable too: fireflies flew endearingly
in the moonless night, red foxes popped up curiously amidst sparse bushes,
and timid mosquitos drew far less blood than their homicidal reputation had
us fear. Gourmet coffee was just about the only shortcoming. As a result, the
Starbuck’s Mocha Frappuccino found in the convenience store fridge had
to suffice for an improvised parking lot celebration. With it, we toasted to
the remaining half of the country. It was the end of June 2012: one full year
before our scheduled arrival in Newfoundland.
ii.
                                              105
106                                    Convenience
       Ever since that cranky springtime moment on the way to Orangeville,
Ontario, I had obsessed over the societal value of off-grid living. Disconnec-
tion had always attracted me. It was a bold act that stood for independence,
self-reliance, and confidence in one’s means and skills. As an individualist it
appealed to me at a profoundly affective level, just as it seduced the imagina-
tion of many others across the country ready to give up the rat race and go
off-the-grid. But I knew that disconnection had its dangers and its price.
Ezra—a Lasqueti Islander with deep awareness of the socio-environmental
potential of the solar industry—had anticipated this a year before in few, but
powerful, words. To live like Canadian off-gridders did was “a colossal lux-
ury,” he had stated dramatically. “What’s wrong with that? We can’t afford
to have billions of people be that luxurious!” Ezra’s words felt right. Would
it make sense for every household in the world to be energy-self-sufficient?
Wouldn’t a world of off-gridders feel atomized, Balkanized? Wouldn’t it be
more efficient to cooperate and pool resources together?
       We were on our way to find out. After a patient search I had gotten invi-
tations to a couple of off-grid co-op farms. Steve, from the Prairie Crocus
Co-op Farm,iii had said we could easily stay for a week or even longer if we
wanted, in exchange for a little work. That was enough time, I hoped, to try
and understand whether collaborative power constellations could function
a bit less autonomously than single detached off-grid homes.
Growing, Storing, Cooking, Eating, Shitting Organic Food
Solar panelsiv were chockablock on the expansive Prairie Crocus Co-op Farm
grounds, powering common areas and individual dwellings. A single wind
tower fed into a shared electricity generation system as well. Organic food
was grown in individually owned lots. Right away Steve asked Jon and me to
help with some carpentry work, since a new chicken coop needed to be built.
Taking advantage of the cool morning temperatures we set to work while we
talked and took turns at measuring pieces and hammering them together.
       Besides chickens, the farm communally owned a small family of cows. In
fact, a great variety of food was raised and grown: tomatoes, beets, parsnips,
potatoes, carrots, leafy greens, zucchini, squash, peas, beans,v peppers, garlic,
onions, cabbage, cucumber, herbs and just about any vegetable hardy enough
to withstand the gelid prairie winters and dry summers. The Prairie Crocus
Farm was not a profit-based enterprise. While some cash was generated
selling specialized commodities—Steve, for example, sold the worms he
iii.
iv.
v.
                                 Convenience                                  107
grew in his compost pile—food was harvested to be eaten by its individual
owner or as part of common meals.
    For nighttime Jon and I had found shelter at a cabin-style home at the
southern edge of the farm. It was a small, rustic, wooden house situated
amid tall grasses, poison ivy, and birch and poplar trees. It had tall windows
facing southeast and an inviting fire pit right out front. Inside, two comfort-
able beds occupied the low-clearance loft, which sat atop the kitchen and
living space down the steep staircase. Also downstairs was another bed-
room, temporarily occupied by a WWoofer1 by the name of Elizabeth. The
absence of a fridge and an indoor bathroom, however, presented us with an
interesting challenge in convenience, a challenge that was quite apropos,
given our research interests.
    Dictionaries tell us that convenience is the state of being able to proceed
with ease or little effort. But in contemporary consumer culture convenience
has taken on new meanings. Convenience is now synonymous with lack
of complications and with a lifestyle rendered easy by countless consumer
products and services.2 A cursory analysis of the usage of the word in com-
mon parlance reveals that convenience is now essentially an assemblage of
values and practices focused on accessibility, availability, affordability, speed,
and ease.3 A convenience store and its many convenience foods provide a
good example. Within cities convenience stores seem to be ubiquitous and
easily accessible. The products they sell are generally always available (often
worldwide): 24/7 and year-round. Those products also tend to be inexpen-
sive, and quick and easy to use.
    In contrast, at first glance, off-grid food growth, storage, and consump-
tion seemed so inconvenient to be downright intolerable: foods could
only be available at specific times of the year, their growth would demand
patience and involvement, and their storage and cooking would require
creativity, forethought, and problem solving. Off-gridders’ food-related
practices challenged the dominant meanings of food production, distribu-
tion, consumption, and disposal in similar ways to individuals like modern
homesteaders,4 voluntary simplifiers,5 back-to-the-landers6, smallholders,7
and followers of the slow food movement.8 The meaning of off-grid con-
venience, in sum, seemed to denote something altogether different than it
does in our 7-Eleven-habituated world.
    The social, political, economic, and environmental consequences of the
convenience of our food consumption are often hidden from view or poorly
understood by most of us. Popular books and documentaries have started to
change the way we think about food, but a great deal of awareness remains to
be generated. Take the way foods are stored, for instance. The first self-serve
grocery stores began to emerge in North America and Western Europe dur-
ing the middle of the twentieth century, but larger self-serve supermarkets
108                             Convenience
did not become popular until the late 1960s.9 Supermarket frozen foods
have since played a crucial role in the development of domestic food habits.
    Before home refrigerators and freezers became popular, grocery shopping
had to be done more frequently. The absence of prepared or semi-prepared
frozen foods meant that cooking had to be carried out with basic ingre-
dients and was therefore more time-consuming. And because commercial
refrigeration has also been instrumental in preserving foods shipped across
long distances, the typical dietary regimens of the pre-refrigeration and pre-
freezing era hinged deeply on consumption of locally produced foods.
    Recent statistics show that as many as 96% of people in the Western
world own a freezer today, whereas only 3% owned one as little as 40 years
ago.10 During those four decades women’s employment has increased dra-
matically, and in part women’s growing “time squeeze”11 may explain the
rising popularity of these time-saving devices. But the normalization of cold
storage technologies can also be explained as the outcome of urbanizing
trends. In fact, at first marketers thought that the freezer would only be
popular with farmers—people who faced the problem of conserving large
quantities of harvested or butchered foods for long periods of time.12 How-
ever, as freezers began to be manufactured as small compartments built into
refrigerators, rather than as large stand-alone devices, their reduced price
made them more appealing for the kitchens of urban consumers—who pre-
ferred to drive infrequently to stores to stock up on (and thus freeze) foods
and take advantage of bulk-buying offers.
    The gradual development of “fast-freezing” technologies that better con-
served the taste of frozen foods also won many skeptical customers over, and
soon frozen foods became the epitome of consumerist convenience. Yet, few
people now seem to realize that a typical refrigerator/freezer combo con-
stantly consumes 540 watts/hour and, therefore, accounts for about a quar-
ter of the electricity used by all the domestic appliances found in a home.
                                        ***
While Jon finished his (and my) work on the chicken coop, Elizabeth and
I raced with the growingly warmer sun to complete the time-consuming
manual irrigation of Steve’s garden. Steve preferred we dunk metallic water-
ing cans into barrels full of water warmed up by sun exposure, rather that
employ garden hoses. But soon enough the scorching sun became unbear-
able. The rest of the hot day, useless for work, was up for grabs. “Wanna drive
to town for coffee?” Jon tempted me the moment I sat down, “that way we
can stock up on ice for our cooler and get some snacks too.”
    Americanos for him and flavored lattes for me were turning out to be a
serious fieldwork vice. It was something of which we were feeling particularly
                                      Convenience                                 109
guilty in Manitoba because we were so invested in praising the virtues of
local food consumption, but—in our defense—coffee house stops allowed
us to take care of important email, telephone, and, . . . er, constitutional
duties too. Yes, it may seem silly, but the outhouse behind our cabin intimi-
dated me at first. Though the idea of an outhouse is unassailable—“why
would you want to shit within the same walls where you eat?” we had been
asked many times by off-gridders, “and why would you throw away all that
good fertilizer?”—the habit of flushing ran deep within me.
     The history of the bathroom reveals that such collective habit isn’t an
old one, though. The toilet bowl was patented in 1778 by Joseph Bramah.
However, a toilet’s functioning depends on plumbing, pressurized water,
underground sewers, water mains, and municipal waste treatment facili-
ties—an infrastructure that has only been common in the Western world
as of recently. Therefore, latrines, chamber pots, or similar tools fulfilled the
function of the toilet bowl until well into the twentieth century.13 Prior to
the advent of flushing, human waste had to be carried away manually or
evacuated through gravity-based drainage into cesspits. Cesspits in turn fed
into covered-over streams that paralleled streets, sometimes flowing directly
into rivers or other bodies of water, and sometimes making their way to
collection centers where waste would be collected and transported to the
countryside to be used as fertilizer.
     Off-grid homes across Canada were always disconnected from munici-
pal mains and sewers and therefore had to take care of their own business.
Many off-gridders solved this problem with a septic system: a simple and clean
solution implemented in most rural homes of the on-grid variety as well. But
septic systems are costly to install and need to be pumped out every three
years. Outhouse-based systems, instead, were cheaper, easier to build, and more
self-sustaining. Instead of shipping away years of intestinal output, fecal mat-
ter could be treated locally and eventually re-integrated into the food cycle—
or at least fed to flowers, shrubs, or fruit trees—in the form of composted
“humanure.vi”14 Even more simply, urine could be easily directed at—or spilled
on, if it was collected first in a bucket—vegetation, especially fruit trees.15
     The word “outhouse” typically brings to mind gross memories of poorly
maintained campground facilities, but most domestic outhouses are clean
and function rather effectively. After depositing one’s leavings and drop-
ping nothing else but soiled toilet paper, the defecator simply needs to add
a scoop of sawdust, peat moss, ashes, or similar material into the container
and pull down a cover. Some outhouses have different chambers where poop
decomposes slowly onsite, whereas others yield raw material needing the
user’s immediate involvement.
vi.
110                                   Convenience
      Our cabin’s outhouse was of the latter type, hence my circumspection.
There, a common five-gallon plastic bucket was placed under a toilet seat.
After completing one’s mission the job entailed sliding the bucket from
under the toilet seat, delivering the goods to a fresh pile of composting
material, and scooping a handful of dry leaves into the bucket, which was
then put in its place again. The heap of dry leaves worked like a charm;
preventing shit from sticking to the bucket and simultaneously covering the
fresh load (thus covering the smell and protecting it from flies) when it was
deposited into the compost pile.
      Composting humanure was a meaningful practice too. Compost toilet
usage allowed off-gridders to engage in alternate relations with place by
conserving local water resources and by enabling them to re-frame urine
and feces as “generative, life-giving matter.”16 Human waste is, of course,
socially perceived to be disgusting, unhealthy, and polluting,17 and therefore
by their radical re-orientation toward it off-gridders managed to refute an
assemblage that treated the municipal disposal of waste as a manifestation
of an individual’s right not to be inconvenienced with the consequences of
one’s consumption. This re-orientation marked the entire food cycle at the
farm and in many other off-grid homes across the country.
De-Concession
With no bathrooms available, the communal pond and Steve’s sauna served
as our bodily cleansing sites. Perhaps prudishly—given the general tendency
around the Prairie Crocus to freely disrobe—Jon and I kept our trunks on
at both sites, but at no expense of intimacy with Steve and some of his fel-
low farmers. During a particularly insightful conversation Steve, kicking back
by our bonfirevii after an intensely relaxing and somewhat mystical sauna,
explained why he believed in the redeeming value of simplicity. Global capital-
ism, he found, promises comfort and convenience but it actually shortchanges
us all. International trade, corporate greed, and consumerism are at the root of
growing social inequality, war, and environmental degradation, he observed.
      Locally grown food and locally harvested energy were partial solutions
to much larger problems, he argued. This was one of the reasons why some
three decades ago he and a few other people purchased the farmland and
decided to invest in a future of food security, self-reliance, and sustainable
living. Growing food locally was a simple and effective way of fighting
against concentrated agricultural production, flavor standardization, crop
hyper-specialization, and the carbon footprint generated by distant food
vii.
                               Convenience                                   111
distribution. Steve believed that small-scale, diversified, localized produc-
tion was also a way of re-introducing a level of humanness into the cycle
of food growth. This is why the Prairie Crocus farm was also organic and
powered by renewables. The avoidance of pesticides and carbon emissions
showed that growing and cooking food was something that could be done
cheaply and simply.
   Yet, not enough people do it. To be sure, alternative food networks are
growing all over the globe,18 and undoubtedly these movements have had a
meaningful impact on the mainstream. But findings by researchers such as
Silva19—who found that cooking ranges and ovens were rated the least use-
ful domestic appliances by many London families—show that taking care
of one’s own food is an inconvenient activity for many people.
   To not do something one is able to do is an interesting phenomenon,
equivalent to a concession. After all, when we let others do something we can
do, we concede to them. To concede means to give way; to yield to others; to
grant them a right, duty, or privilege to do something for us, in lieu of us. At
times concession is the result of defeat (as when territories are given away
to foreign political and economic powers), and at other times it is the result
of free bargaining (as in the case of concession stands operating under lease-
like contracts), but regardless of circumstances, to concede is to surrender.
   Concessions can be practically useful but they can also have unpredict-
able consequences. Some people may find it convenient to let others cook a
quick meal for them, but fast-foods—an example of that concession—have
contributed to a preoccupying growth in obesity, diabetes, and osteopenia.20
And convenience foods, which now occupy more space in supermarkets
than fresh produce,21 have destabilized traditional diets as well as entire
economies worldwide.22 Conceding the task of cooking to the distant
supply chains that make meals-on-the-go “creates a tragic disconnection
between the general public and the social and environmental consequences
of the food being grown and eaten.”23 As food chains continue to grow in
more complex ways, production and consumption are split farther apart,
causing loss of biodiversity, degradation of water and soil, weakening of
community ties, concentration of capital, reduction in agricultural resilience,
erasure of local identity-based and place-based foodways, and ultimately
food insecurity.24 These concessions contribute to “thinning the lifeworld”25
by fracturing food practices, skills, knowledge, and values previously tied to
sense of place, locality, and community.
   The main reason why so many people make concessions to fast-food res-
taurants, ready-made food producers, and supermarkets is practical conve-
nience. In fact, marketers effectively advertise fast-foods26 and convenience
foods27 by extolling their time-saving virtues. In addition to speed, consum-
ers find accessibility, affordability, and availability to be appealing qualities
112                             Convenience
of fast-foods and convenience foods.28 Many shoppers also view these ele-
ments of convenience as essential in their decision on where and when to
shop29 and are therefore prone to patronize large, easily accessible, one-stop
supermarket chains over alternative distributors. Convenience also explains
the popularity of cooking with “on demand” kitchen technologies like toast-
ers and microwave ovens30 over alternatives like more frequent shopping for
fresh products, cooking from scratch, and consuming shared meals. Conve-
nience, in a nutshell, seems to broadly justify concession.
   Current dominant discourses on convenience “speak to the problem of liv-
ing in a social world where people act in response to the feeling that they have
insufficient time.”31 In this context, alternative time-consuming choices like
growing one’s own food, cooking from basic ingredients, buying at organic
farmers’ markets, and seeking out local and fair-trade products may be valued
in their own ways32 but can hardly be perceived as convenient. The persistent
reputation of alternative foods such as organic and fair-trade products is in
fact that of being more expensive, not always available, harder to find, and
more time-consuming overall; a reputation that has gained them a degree
of distinction among conspicuous seekers of taste,33 but relatively limited
market penetration. Now, this is not to say that critiques are non-existent or
that counterhegemonic choices are unavailable, but more simply it is to sug-
gest that fast-foods, convenience foods, and supermarket chain products have
come to embody and even redefine the dominant meaning of convenience.34
   As the bonfire flames continued to protect us from the mosquitos, Jon
and I opened a second beer. Steve did not. There was a good deal of hedo-
nism going on elsewhere on farm grounds, but in contrast Steve seemed
more parsimonious, heedful, and solitary. Living like this can be hard work,
he said. But it allowed for a genuine existence. It could be backbreaking
to try to be self-sufficient, but it was a lifestyle that put him in touch with
nature and the “creator.”
   “You know, I have a theory,” he opined when I asked him how he dealt
with the inconvenience of living without some of the creature comforts
common to most contemporary homes. “I call it the ratchet effect.”
   I smiled, “You’ve got a pretty good academic-sounding name for it, watch
out I might steal it!”
   He laughed. “Well, tell me what you think. My theory is that our society
relates to convenience the same way a ratchet works. We ratchet up the lad-
der of convenience by becoming used to . . . I mean, by taking for granted
things that we could only dream of in the recent past. But then we become
unable to go back. Just like the way a ratchet works; we can only go one
way. We get used to eating bananas from Central America, kiwis from New
Zealand, grapes from Chile or this or that place, every single day of the year
and soon enough we become unable to live without those things.”
                                 Convenience                                113
    He was right: that is why I felt so guilty about my favorite Arabica beans
shipped from Costa Rica. And I wish I could have patented Steve’s theory,
but when I looked into it, it had already been claimed. Sociologists of con-
sumption have articulated the ratchet-like escalating process whereby cumu-
lating comfort and convenience become increasingly difficult to scale back
from.35 But over the last decade more than a handful of de-escalations—at
least within the context of food—have actually gained favor with people.
Alternative agro-food networks, community food security programs, demo-
cratic agriculture initiatives, post-productivist trends, shortened food chains,
epicurean fashions, organic and fair trade markets, the slow food movement,
and other similar plans have aimed to re-instill a sense of place in the gas-
tronomic landscape.36
    Such de-concessions from the world of distant production and drive-
through convenience have resulted in partially re-localizing and re-possessing
systems of food production and consumption, have raised awareness about
food insecurity, and have enacted a strong resistance to concentrated agricul-
tural corporatism. In small ways these are also the de-concessions practiced
by off-grid smallholders like Steve. To de-concede is to redeem the right, duty,
privilege, and even pleasure of doing something for oneself. A de-concession
is a recapture, a re-possession, a reclamation of what used to be one’s own.
De-concessions re-spatialize and re-configure assemblages of materials, insti-
tutions, practices, representations, and experiences.
    Off-grid de-concessions go two steps further than all the other counter-
hegemonic attempts to re-configure food assemblages. The first step per-
tains to food preparation. Re-localized food programs, plans, schemes, and
movements of all kinds make no mention of how sustainable food cooking
should be. A potato may very well be locally grown, organic, and fair trade
but once it’s baked in an electric oven powered by a grid fueled by coal,
the environmental score is far from settled. The second step concerns the
meaning of convenience. To truly recapture a sense of food security and
sovereignty we must believe that our meals are not only better for us and the
planet, but also more convenient. This is hardly the case when organic foods
continue to be more expensive and harder to find than their counterparts.
By cooking local food with local energy resources and by re-framing that
practice as truly convenient, Steve and the Prairie Crocus Co-op Farm were
making important de-concessions.
Sun-Dried Everything
Convenience reigns supreme in the modern kitchen. Electric ovens and
ranges, freezers, refrigerators, microwaves, toasters, blenders, rice-cookers,
bread-makers, juicers, hot plates, grills, and a whole circus of other pluggable
114                            Convenience
“labor-saving devices” do their gig quickly and with limited user involve-
ment. But electric appliances devour a lot of power. When your generating
capacity is limited, the quest for convenience has to operate by different
rules.
   Take food conservation, for example. Power-hungry refrigerators and
freezers can easily be replaced by old practices like canning, brewing, pick-
ling, salting, and dehydrating—all practices that our grandparents were
probably very familiar with, but that most of us have never learned or have
forgotten. Or consider the usefulness of root cellars as an electricity-free
alternative to refrigeration and freezing. A root cellar is a structure the size
of a small garage that is built underground or directly underneath a natural
or human-made mound of dirt, wood, and rocks. Using no energy at all,
root cellars work like natural refrigerators, preventing food from freezing
during winter and from spoiling due to excessive heat during summer. In
off-grid homes where refrigeration and freezing were nearly impossible due
to the low power-generation of the systems in place, these old technologies
allowed for food to last well into the next season.
                                     ***
The biting sun was about to bore a hole into my skull when Elizabeth asked
me if I wanted to help with dinner preparation.
   “Will you need to fire up a woodstove?” I asked hesitantly.
   “No.”
   “Let’s go then.”
   Elizabeth and Sarah had gathered the ingredients for a summer vegetar-
ian meal: beet (yes with a t, not an f) burgers and tortilla wraps filled with
fresh greens and homemade hummus. We began our work by peeling the
beets. Then we grated them and added finely diced onions, garlic, eggs, and
seasonings. In the meantime we prepared the hummus: mashing chickpeas
and mincing more garlic, adding lemon juice, olive oil, and tahini. Every-
thing was done by hand—even cleaning and washing with hand-carried
jugs and buckets of water—and then carefully setting kitchen waste aside
for the compost pile.
   While many ingredients came from the farm, not all did. Tahini, chick-
peas, olive oil, and wraps were nearly impossible to produce on site, so they
were all acquired from the grocery store. Sarah and Elizabeth were prag-
matic about it; while it’s important to eat what you grow, the climate and
soil only allowed what they could. Time and effort were critical factors too.
While localization and sustainability were essential, so was enjoying life’s
simple pleasures. Militant industriousness and hardline environmental ide-
ology can get in the way of carefree downtime.
                                       Convenience                                   115
       Generally, off-gridders across Canada would cook with propane stoves,
woodstoves, or both. Propane could be easily bottled and transported, with
no need for pipelines for domestic distribution (as opposed to natural gas).
However, propane is a non-renewable fuel and its burning causes a modest
but detectable carbon emission, so not all off-gridders—especially the more
environmentally minded ones—liked to use it. Woodstoves, in contrast,
used a locally grown renewable resource and emitted only as much carbon
as wood yields naturally by way of gradual decomposition,37 so they were an
environmentally preferable alternative (if used on a small scale). But wood
burning for the sake of cooking had its downsides as well, like unwanted
heat. Woodstove operation was also more time-consuming and complex
than cooking with electric or gas-fueled ranges and ovens.
       With no electric tools available, and in order to avoid both the use of pro-
pane and firewood, Sarah and I lined the beet patties on two large baking
sheets and brought them outside to bake in one of the solar ovens.viii I slid the
baking sheets inside and immediately the skin of my hands sensed the pen-
etrating warmth of the sun trapped by the oven’s glass cover. The temperature
was certainly lower than a typical oven—it generally took twice as long to cook
food in a solar oven of that size—but undoubtedly serviceable. These ovens
were indeed much bigger than we had seen in Dave’s backyard on Lasqueti,
reaching up to eight feet in height and about six in width. Even more remark-
able than their size was their makeup: all their components had been carefully
rescued and recovered. The glass and plywood came from industrial construc-
tion sites, for example, and the metal sheets from an old printing press.
       While the sun went to work on our burgers, Gijsix offered to give us an
extended tour. Duly shirtless, but covered in layers of charisma, Gijs spoke
softly, with a faint Dutch accent. He was born in 1947 in Groningen, Hol-
land, and had moved to Canada three decades ago. What appealed most
to him about the Prairie Crocus culture was the “incredible potential for
creative expression. . . . It’s amazing what you can do,” he said, “when there
is nobody around telling you that you can’t do this and you can’t do that.”
He wasn’t bombastic—Gijs was one of the most inventive and resourceful
off-gridders we’d ever met.
       A peek into his summer kitchen alone would have convinced anyone of
that. The summer kitchen was a small building separate from his house:
an airy, wooden shed set amidst tall shade trees. “Check out my answer to
refrigeration,” he said as he invited us in. With the flick of a button a low
whirring noise sprung from the floor. Lacking the sufficient power for a
refrigerator—his four solar panels only gave him 300 watts/hour on a sunny
day—Gijs stored perishables in the natural coolness of the earth six feet
viii.
116                                   Convenience
underground, beneath his summer kitchen floor. The whirring sound came
from a home-built pulley that hoisted a wooden tray and rolled it all the way
up to the floor level. As the tray reached our feet a small bulb lit up. “Cheese,
anyone?” Gijs smiled.
     The low-wattage food elevator wasn’t Gijs’s only invention. Using a fan
from a discarded computer he had devised a gadget that blew air into a com-
partment of his summer kitchen’s cooking woodstove. This caused a faster
fire, which enabled him to make coffee more quickly, to burn less wood, and
to create less unwanted heat in the kitchen. The bonanza of unpatented
inventions was far from over.
     Inside his house, a thermometer had been rigged to a door opener. When
the temperature reached the desired level, the door opener clicked into action
by shutting, or opening if needed, windows and doors—sort of an automatic,
“natural” air-conditioning system. All of this was, of course, on 12-volt electric-
ity, which he had learned to use from a 30-year-old typewritten manual picked
up at Radio Shack. “When you have little money you allow for the release of
creativity,” he remarked. “You can’t be afraid, you just have to try and do it,” he
said, “when you’ve got money to buy already-made stuff you learn nothing.”
     The piercing ding of an insistent bell suddenly interrupted our chat.­
Dinner was ready. Before we could sink our teeth in, the nine of us joined
hands in the broad dining hall and sang our thanks. Equally unaccustomed
to pre-dinner grace rituals or to celebrations of communal lovey feelings, Jon
and I were relieved the fanfare was over quickly enough. The beet burger
was charred to perfection and the hummus as tangy as it should have been,
but their taste’s true distinction was our sheer involvement in it. I knew
from my home garden as well that food tasted different when you cared for
its soil, grew it, and cooked it yourself. In the delightful words of another
Manitoba off-gridder: “It’s like living in a house you built.”
                                              ***
As our experiences at the farm and elsewhere in Canada had shown us,
off-grid food production and consumption were about re-inventing conve-
nience and re-discovering the value of sustainably cooked local flavors. This
was off-gridders’ disposition to food, but such orientation to convenience
pervaded every corner of their homes and every aspect of their lifestyle.
But we need to be careful not to lionize off-gridders. As romantic as it may
sound to try to live simply, more self-sufficiently, sustainably, and in a resil-
ient and ingenious way, we must understand that off-grid living required
many compromises. Similarly, we can’t sing the praises of “the local” too
ix.
                                Convenience                                117
much. Sociological and geographic research on “localism” has exposed the
dangers inherent in a “romantic essentialism of place”38 and criticized the
parochialism, provincialism, reactionary conservatism, and isolationism that
un-reflexive localism may possibly slide into.39
     With this said, we’d also make a mistake by not learning from the impor-
tant lessons that off-grid food production and consumption can offer to
the rest of us. The key teachings can be found in the implications of the
de-concessions made through off-grid food production and consumption.
Off-grid food production and consumption—and off-grid living more
broadly—reclaimed a sense of place by re-inventing convenience as suit-
ability, simplicity, unhurriedness, harmoniousness, and proximity. Through this
re-assemblage, convenience was de-conceded from distant corporate powers
and their concentrated food supply chains. This de-concession prompted
new socio-natural connections, new flavors, and new positive practices
counterbalancing the “thinning out of the lifeworld.”40 Such de-concession
constituted a reflexive but “militant particularism” that “seize[d] upon the
qualities of place, reanimate[d] the bond between the environmental and
the social, and [sought] to bend the social processes by constructing space-
time to a radically different purpose.”41
     Off-grid food production and consumption aimed to be suitable by try-
ing to fit with the characteristics of a place. Something that is suitable is
convenient because it is appropriate, reasonable, befitting, and expedient.
Mass-scale producers of convenience foods want their products to be the
same everywhere, regardless of local conditions. Instead, off-grid food pro-
duction and consumption were intertwined in profound ways with local
knowledge, geography, and sense of place. Through its sensual qualities—
smells, textures, taste, etc.—place-suitable food helped build emotional and
affective ties between people and place.42
     By producing and consuming foods that were suitable to their places,
off-gridders worked within a “food-shed”43 that realigned human activ-
ity with the natural and social elements of the environment, including
weather patterns, water availability, soil and slope conditions, and local
market demand and traditions. “Foodsheds embed the system in a moral
economy attached to a particular community and place, just as water-
sheds reattach water systems to a natural ecology,”44 so growing and eating
  food originating within one’s foodshed—and fertilizing such food with
­humanure—was convenient because it was suitable with the social nature
 of a specific place.
     Off-grid food production and consumption were simple in the sense
 that they were genuine, basic, rustic, and down to earth. Simplicity is a
 direct synonym of convenience, but whereas the uncomplicatedness of
 ­mass-marketed convenience foods resides in their ease of preparation, the
118                             Convenience
simplicity of off-grid foods lay in their plain, genuine flavor. All the off-grid
meals we had across the country—from Yukon potatoes and Saskatoon ber-
ries to Arctic char and Atlantic lobster—had a distinct goût de terroir, as the
French commonly say: a taste of the earth where they came from. Tradi-
tionally, French cuisine has entailed either sophisticated, complex, and cos-
mopolitan flavors, or a kind of simpler domestic quality embedded in local
ingredients, artisanal products, and farming traditions. The latter is a type of
plain cuisine infused with terroir: with “the earth considered from the point
of view of agriculture”45 and with the flavor of specific locales. Thus the kind
of simplicity inherent in a beet burger or a home-raised, free-range chicken
cooked in a solar oven—as Steve prepared for us one night—allowed us to
taste not only food but also soil, climate, and the fruit of hard work. It was
a simple convenience that did not exempt you from involvement in growth
and preparation, but rather asked you and rewarded you for your meaningful
engagement with whatever you ate.
    Off-grid food production and consumption were also unhurried. Com-
modified, quick-mart, and supermarket foods promise convenience because
they are quick to buy and fast to prepare. All of these products appeal to
us only insofar as we are in a hurry. Off-gridders instead got at the root of
the problem by directly attacking the condition of hurriedness.46 Growing,
cooking, and eating food slowly made perfect sense within a slower lifestyle
in general, and not as expedients to save time in order to get busy with
something else.
    Like the slow food movement, off-grid food production and consump-
tion aimed to protect the values of mundane pleasures, to respect natural
rhythms, to re-discover heritage, and to re-instill into everyday life the hab-
its and rituals of a less frantic way of living. And like the slow food move-
ment in general, off-grid food production and consumption re-imagined
a kind of convenience that resided in a placid discontinuation of the cur-
rent dominant work-spend-work-spend mode of living and in enjoyment
of relaxed conviviality. Convenience, therefore, lay not in a quick pace but
in calm and tranquility.
    As well, off-grid food production and consumption unfolded in relative
harmony with the elements of a place.47 Harmoniousness is a less known, but
historically well-established, meaning of the word convenience. The word
derives from the Latin com- (“with,” “together”) and venire (“to come”).
Something that is convenient is something that comes together in agree-
ment and harmony with other things. There were two kinds of harmony
at play in off-grid food production and consumption. The first was a kind
of harmony with the resources available in a particular place, which ranged
                                 Convenience                                    119
from indigenous vegetation to the refrigeration and cooking possibilities
allowed by weather and climate.
      The second kind of harmony was a social one. Like other local food
systems, the Prairie Crocus resurrected the traditional idea of place-based
communities as “basic building blocks and foundations of our society, mak-
ing critical contributions to the quality of families, interpersonal relation-
ships, education, health, environment, food systems, economy, and overall
well-being.”48 Cooking in common kitchens, sharing food, pooling money
to purchase staples, making collective decisions, and harvesting common
resources like water, the sun, wood, and soil were ways in which the off-
gridders we visited came together as a community to tackle food security.
      Finally, off-grid food production and consumption re-invented the
notion of convenience as something that is close-at-hand. The kind of
proximity practiced by off-grid food producers and consumers was differ-
ent from the accessibility typical of supermarkets, fast-food restaurants, and
convenience stores. Whereas the latter promise convenience through ample
parking lots, drive-throughs, and ubiquity, off-grid foods came from places
even closer to the kitchen table—they were grown or raised in the backyard
and stored and cooked with resources available within one’s land. Proximity,
as opposed to accessibility, shortened the relations between food production
and consumption, re-configured the very idea of food distribution, and re-
embedded food growth within the domestic space.
      Off-grid food systems challenged large supply chains and managed to
reduce food miles.49 Proximity therefore also informed trust, environmen-
  tal stewardship, and familiarity. Localized food growth was an important
­de-concession from the industrialized food systems that have breached
 ­consumer trust, exerted animal cruelty, introduced “Frankenstein foods,” and
  homogenized flavor.50 Proximity short-circuited the lengthy food chains of
agro-capitalism, lifting the veil on the provenance of local food while cast-
ing shadows on the anonymity of the producers of mass-market products.51
                                         ***
  It was certainly difficult to disagree in principle with all these values. It was
  easier, however, to differ in practice. Not all of us have the space to grow
  our own food or store it in root cellars, or cook with woodstoves and solar
  ovens. Not many people can compost food scraps in their city apartments,
  let alone their bodily waste. There simply isn’t enough time in the day to do
  everything we should, or so it seems, and there are strong geographical and
  logistical limits to how much food production we can localize.
120                                 Convenience
    We had left Ontario earlier in the spring with serious questions about
the feasibility and consequences of off-grid living on a large scale, and now
more interrogatives were piling up. To de-concede, even a little, was better
than to surrender and do nothing—that much was clear. Understanding
and practicing convenience differently and more reflexively, as off-gridders
in Manitoba and elsewhere did, was undoubtedly important. But was it
enough to make a difference? Did it entail too much sacrifice—so much
that it was nearly impossible for most of us to ratchet back to? Off-grid
living also demanded a lot of work, and could everyone afford to invest that
much time and bodily energy in their domestic life?
    To boot, sharing resources for power generation seemed to work quite
well for the two co-op farms we had visited, but the unique lifestyles and
profound collaboration those arrangements required were obviously not
going to appeal to many people in an individualistic culture like ours. Even
I, with all my best intentions, had felt—in as little as a few days—that it was
challenging to get along with every neighbor. In short, co-op grids offered
no more superior solutions than detached off-grid dwellings.
    Though we had now made it halfway across the country, it was obvi-
ous that we were nowhere near finding the answer to whether off-grid liv-
ing could be a better way of life for all of us. Or perhaps this was just a
wrong question to ask. It was certain that by virtue of their involvement
with nature, technology, their homes, their beloved land, and their sources of
energy, off-gridders were able to deeply affect the quality of their day-to-day
lives, enjoying domestic comforts and conveniences as much as the rest of us,
but in a radically different manner because of their lifestyle orientation, or
better yet, the way in which they inhabited place. But was this for everyone?
Could anyone do it?


8 House-Building, DIW-Style

“Well, Phillip, homes are an extension of who we are, you know.”
      “So, what in the world does living in an arkii say about you!?” I inquired,
feeling baffled. Mike paused to think. Like biblical Noah’s Hail-Mary pass
at end-of-the-world carpentry, Mike and Monique’s 5,000-square-foot,
120-foot-long ark-like home in the Gatineau Hills stood as an impossibly
creative display of resolve, vision, and whimsical problem solving.
      “Well, I am the only one who knows how this house works because I built
it myself,” he answered firmly, “and I built it to suit me. If Monique and I
ever broke up I’d have to take the house because she couldn’t live here by
herself ! No one could!” he laughed loudly.
      “Come this way, I wanna show you my second generator,” Mike said, as
he started walking toward the ground floor workroom. The second genera-
tor was a custom-built, small-block, four-cylinder Merck engine that he and
a buddy rescued from a boat and converted to propane. The engine was
equipped with a 200-amp 12-volt alternator that he had recovered from a
military Humvee. Mike and his friend had rigged the generator to harvest
the heat from the exhaust through an AVS pipe. The exhaust was then sent
through a heat exchanger and efficiently delivered upstairs to warm up the
living room and kitchen. As for the leftover fumes, a trip to the outside
confirmed my hunch: an exhaust pipe sticking out of the side of his house
sat ready to puff out the discarded noxious gas. “There is only one of those
in the world!” Mike cracked while I scratched my head at the contraption.
ii.
                                              123
124                    House-Building, DIW-Style
   “I have two inverters for my solar panels,” Mike explained, moving on
with the tour, “this house is full of redundancies.” His first inverter was a
normal one, but his second one had been recovered from an ambulance.
“Three kilowatts! This thing is just pure power, it’s a workhorse!” he boasted
as he switched it on to let a robotic, buzzing hum echo his argument. The
device, which he concocted once again following the suggestion of the same
“crazy-mad scientist” friend, allowed his electrical system to handle the
“hammer” of power demand brought on by the starting-up of a power tool.
   Mike was not only an electrical wizard, but also an ingenious carpenter.
His house used to be a saw mill that—due to no more plausible a reason
than the fact that the guy who initially built it was “crazy”—was curiously
shaped like an ark. When Mike and Monique bought it in 2003, the mill
amounted to just three walls and a roof. Raw logs used to be driven indoors,
where the front entrance of their house now stood, and all the millwork
would go on downstairs. Upstairs, some rooms had been roughed in for
future office space, but the place had fallen into complete decay so it and
the adjacent 164-acre property sold for a bargain $99,000. Undaunted by
the massive renovation task, Mike did beam-and-post work, insulated the
structure, added drywall, finished the rooms, and took care of the plumbing,
painting, and flooring. Going off-grid was a simple necessity to avoid paying
an exorbitant Hydro Quebec connection bill.
   “How did you figure out how to do all these home improvement proj-
ects?” I wondered. It wasn’t a token question; Mike had a MBA and a con-
sulting business in corporate leadership and team building. He also ran a
campground and organized youth outdoor education programs, snowshoe
races, and weddings on his property. There was no architectural or construc-
tion training at all in his Jack-of-All-Trades background.
   “That’s what’s so great about the internet!”
   “You mean, you . . .”
   “Yeah, I Googled plumbing and all that stuff.”
   We all roared in laughter. “It’s common sense,” he continued. “You don’t
need to know everything. I don’t even know the terminology. What’s the
difference between a rafter and a joist?”
   “I wouldn’t know . . .”
   “It’s just common sense. With plumbing, water runs downhill, that’s all
you need to know. Electricity? Electricity is even easier. With kids some-
times I hear the word ‘can’t.’ ‘Can’t?!?’ That word doesn’t exist.”
   We had been in Quebec for a week by then, and though it wasn’t unusual
for off-gridders to build their own homes, la belle province seemed packed
with DIY builders like Mike: crafty individuals who—despite not being
architects or professional contractors—managed to find ways to assemble
                       House-Building, DIW-Style                             125
their own houses. Like Mike, the average consumer interested in doing it
oneself these days has the ability to source knowledge from a bottomless pile
of DIY books for dummies, reference manuals, websites, YouTube videos,
and ezines readily prepared to break down steps, exemplify, and demonstrate
procedures.
    Social historian Steven Gelber1 has observed that the moniker “do-it-
yourself ” (or “DIY” for short) dates back to 1912, when an article in the
popular magazine Suburban Life first used that expression to encourage
homeowners to take on minor renovation projects on their own rather than
hire professional contractors. DIY was set for an impressive uptake in popu-
lar interest. With the subsequent historical rise in suburban and exurban
home ownership,2 the articulation of ordinary maintenance and renovation
with evolving ideologies of both masculinity and femininity,3 the progres-
sive commercialization of home-improvement tools and supplies,4 and the
explosion of lifestyle media promoting home- and garden-based hobbies and
identity-based domestic consumption,5 DIY has become part and parcel of
contemporary consumer culture. Part self-expressive hobby, part ostentatious
consumption and ego-boosting skill display, and part convenient utilization
of handy money-saving skills,6 DIY building and home-improvement sym-
bolize and exercise practical knowledge capital, lifestyle choices, and autono-
mous control over possessions.7
    Do-it-yourselfers are a diverse group of people. While the majority are
men, women’s participation has been growing steadily, outpacing the growth
in men’s rates.8 Members of many different socioeconomic groups engage
in DIY often for different reasons, such as to save money, or to spend dis-
posable income in self-affirming hobbies or social status-enhancing proj-
ects.9 DIY, however, is not exactly for everybody. Many everyday obligations
compete with DIY projects for people’s attention, including leisure options,
family responsibilities, and paid work.10 Heightened social and geographi-
cal mobility also end up reducing the transfer of skills across generations,
friends, and neighbors, rendering it difficult for aspiring DIY practitioners
to learn how to tackle projects through personal networks.11 Formal build-
ing codes also make it impossible for unlicensed individuals to tackle cer-
tain projects, especially electricity-related ones. Ingenious DIYers who build
their own homes with creative designs, innovative techniques, and alterna-
tive resources and materials, therefore, easily stand out among a mass of
weekend handymen and handywomen carrying out smaller projects.
    For the better part of the last three decades, the DIY ethos has been rou-
tinely lionized as the epitome of resistance across the cultural sciences.12 As a
result it would be tempting to suggest that DIY home builders are countercul-
tural heroes fighting against the erosion of the private sphere, the compression
126                      House-Building, DIW-Style
of everyday time, the hyper-specialization of skill, the loss of orally transmit-
ted lay knowledge, the massification of residential architecture, the homog-
enization of domestic design, and the commercialization of building trades.
Such characterization would be an overstatement, however.
    As it turns out, the off-gridders we met in Quebec and elsewhere revealed
something altogether different about the nature of home building and DIY.
Our encounters showed us that it always took a village to raise a barn, so
to speak. Mike’s example was a great one; despite his ingenuity, creativity,
and resolve Mike could only build his house with the help of other people,
such as friends willing to invest time and skills, professionals able to provide
occasional advice, and internet-mediated experts waiting to be downloaded
at a moment’s notice.
    The expression “do-it-yourself ” connotes an individualistic, self-oriented,
self-sufficient impetus that does not match actual practice.13 It is therefore no
accident that doing-it-oneself has taken on the aura of a lone, last-man-standing,
heroic, resistant response to a stable structure of domination.14 A corrective to
this romantic bias is to view individuals such as off-grid home builders as people
who did not break away from, or openly contest, greater social forces, but rather as
people who articulated their practices with such forces through different associa-
tive relations, or different “entanglements.”15
    These different entanglements manifested themselves in ways such as
the employment of sustainable design, the recovery of vernacular archi-
tectural traditions, and the quest for a different way of inhabiting place.
Together these entanglements of people, materials, and places demonstrated
how the building of an off-grid home was not a resistant or defiant DIY
act, but rather a practical application of skill. This was a skillset residing in
a self-consciously practical and pragmatic orientation to building as a way
of establishing connections16 rather than severing or resisting ties. It was
a set of regenerative life skills through which off-gridders exercised modest
but meaningful degrees of control over their life circumstances and through
which they brought practical know-how, dedication, resolve, judgment,
creativity, passion, and their lifestyle values to bear on their day-to-day
existence.
Building with Dirt and Garbage
Jon and I had sketched a very reasonable itinerary this time. Second only
to the territory of Nunavut, Quebec was simply too large to cover with any
pretentions of wholeness. Language was an issue too, so we had figured
our chances of meeting bilingual off-gridders would be greater by situat-
ing ourselves between Montreal and Laval to the east and Gatineau to the
                              House-Building, DIW-Style                            127
west. It was a prudent strategy. Besides, the Outaouais, Laurentides, and
Lanaudière regions were spectacular, so much so that even off-grid tour-
ism was booming there. Case in point, the upscale Fairmont hotel chain
offered off-grid cabin accommodations in equally upscale Montebello.
Since we could benefit from shoulder season rates, I phoned to book a
few nights.
        “Are you sure?” said the voice on the other end of the line in a heavily
French-inflected English. “We are not the typical Fairmont, you know? To
reach that cabin you’d have to drive for an hour on an unpaved road, and
once at the cabins there is no . . .”
        “I’m sure. We’re in the business of writing about peace and quiet,” I
­re-assured the lady.
        “Well, then you’re getting a bargain. There are hardly any other guests at
this time. You’ll have 65,000 acres of protected wilderness for yourselves.”
        “Did she just say 65,000 acres?” I thought.
        She wasn’t being grandiose. One of the largest game and fishing reserves
on the continent, the land had been given away by the King of France in
1674. Countless moose, wild turtles, and 70 lakes—several of them stocked
with trout—were shared by 20 cabins, most of which depended on the usual
combo of solar, propane, and wood. With our relatively modest nightly rate
we were also given access to two kayaks, a canoe, a barbeque, and our own
undisturbed private lake.iii My sour mood and fatigue instantly evaporated
with the first autumn morning mist. As for Jon, I would have asked him how
he felt, but he was out fishing.
        Tearing ourselves away from our luxurious base camp for the day, we
reached Hélène and Alain’s earthship-like homeiv outside Laval after a sin-
 gularly tortuous drive along dreamingly picturesque exurban hillside towns.
 Hélène and I had emailed in French and as we shook hands, nervous at
 having to beg for her indulgence in chatting in English, my red face was as
 bright as the early afternoon sun. Her accommodating disposition felt like a
 relief. Alain, however, was less comfortable with our language and since he
 had errands to run he excused himself.
        “Just make sure you don’t steal my favorite joke,” he teased Hélène on
 his way out.
        “What’s the joke?” I inquired.
        “Ask her what kind of tires we used,” Alain smiled.
        The couple had lived at their off-grid earthship for seven years. Once the
 cameras were rolling, I began with the usual question, holding off on seeking
 the joke’s punch line for the time being.
 iii.
 iv.
128                          House-Building, DIW-Style
       “I like to be able to do everything, repair everything, make everything
myself,” Hélènev began.
       “Is that why you’re off-grid?”
       “I’ve always felt that I’m never better served than by myself,” she replied
convincingly. Her short hair, her practical attire, and her skin naturally
tanned from working under the sun confirmed she was not afraid of toil.
       “Life is full of challenges,” she continued. “I prefer the ones that I know
where they’re coming from. If you build your own house and there’s a leak
in the roof then you know why and how to fix it . . . that’s why in this house
there is no essential element that needs electricity to function, we’re not
dependent on anything in particular.” Everything vital could always be done
some other way, she explained, by applying a practical ethos of re-purposing,
re-combining, and re-using.vi
       Hélène and Alain’s earthship-like home was built by ramming dirt and
sand into discarded motor vehicle tires.vii The tires were packed and stacked
on top of one another to form walls and then plastered over. Tires were easy
to build with and provided remarkable thermal mass—slowly absorbing and
releasing warmth when packed with earth. Earthships were invented and
trademarked by maverick US architect Michael Reynolds, who has famously
touted their passive solar advantage, cost-effectiveness, potential for energy
autonomy, and reliance on abundantly available resources.viii The tires the
Quebec couple used, as Alain’s famous joke went, were the all-season type.
       The wisecrack was well rehearsed—Hélène and Alain’s earthship-like
home had been in the limelight of the sustainable design world for some
time. Mainstream and alternative media had brought much attention to
this otherwise quiet and recluse 15-acre hillside property. That day it was a
group of apprentices from French-speaking Africa who were there to learn
new skills and pay back in volunteer work on the house and garden. Hélène
and Alain’s house was in fact both a home and a classroom. Like the learn-
ing process, Hélène liked to point out, a house was “always going on,” never
finished. The current 800 square feet would double sideways, eventually.
       “You learn by doing,” observed Hélène. But despite her practical and
generalistix leanings, she knew that “doing” was never a solitary ­undertaking.
Filling tires—collected and delivered for free by Recyc Quebec—was noth-
ing but a group effort, with friends and volunteers coming and going as their
availability permitted. Dirt and sand had to be trucked in from a nearby pit
v.
vi.
vii.
viii.
ix.
                           House-Building, DIW-Style                            129
at the cost of about $100 per load. Even the choice of the site where the
house would eventually be built was not a solo effort, as a dowser had been
hired to locate the most ideal water source. Logic, intuition, and common
sense, Hélène explained, were the key building blocks. And of course experi-
ence too: “everything you learn is things that you do, so if you’re interested
in building you’re going to help somebody build their house, and then help
someone else, and then eventually you’ll build your own and ask people to
come and help you.”
     Solar panels provided 300 watts of electricity for their modest domes-
tic needs. Gravity provided water pressure. Composting replaced sewage
lines. Propane fueled their hot-water heater. Re-purposed junk served as
insulation. Wood harvested from their property worked as building mate-
rial and fed their efficient and beautiful rocket stove. Their home backed
deep into the hill at such an angle that almost their entire bedroom lay
cocooned under warm dirt. It was so warm indoorsx that they were able to
grow fig, lime, banana, mandarin, and lemon trees. And a cellular s­ ignal—
the city that occasionally dragged them away for work was indeed not too
far—provided them with internet access. “If it wasn’t for the internet I
wouldn’t have figured out that earthships existed in the first place,” Hélène
quipped.
     Like Mike, Hélène and Alain had built their own house with the help of
others. Making, for them too, was a way of “connecting.”17 “Acts of creativity
usually involve, at some point, a social dimension and connect us with other
people,” media theorist David Gauntlett has observed.18 DIY off-grid build-
ing was therefore more a kind of doing it with others. But Do-It-With, or
DIW, was not just about interpersonal connections. DIW building was also
about “connect[ing] things together (material, ideas, or both) to make some-
thing new.”19 In the case of Hélène and Alain these things included tires,
dirt, sand, wood, and many more other materials. These were the objects
they and their helpers had “woven”20 together to shape their home—they
could not have not done it without these things.
     Arguing that the expression DIY is partial because it overly focuses on
the solo human builder at the expense of material things is not a fastidious
semantic quibble. Non-human agents matter greatly, as volumes of material
culture studies attest. Human and non-human agents in fact generate new
forms of life by becoming entangled together. According to Ingold21 entan-
glements are processes through which humans and non-humans become
intertwined and interdependent. We can think of an entanglement as a type
of relational binding that erases all boundaries between the elements that
comprise it. Take Hélène and Alain’s home, for example.
x.
130                   House-Building, DIW-Style
   Hélène and Alain’s dwelling did not sit atop a piece of land, but was
rather ensconced into it. In other words they did not build on a hill, but
with a hill. Standing on the grassy roof with Hélène, admiring the landscape
from the hillside, I could barely detect there was a house underneath my
feet. They wanted to be inside the hill, she explained, to feel one with it, to
feel its warmth and protection. By doing so, their home was not outside the
ground in any clear way. The plants potted right into the floor and growing
so lushly indoors seemed but to reconfirm this pervasive feeling of entangle-
ment. There was no obvious division between the inside of the home and its
outside—a blurring of boundaries also reinforced by how the southern sun
penetrated the large windows to warm up the interior, as well as how water
flowed from the hilltop into their faucets by sheer gravity. The entanglement
of home, water, sun, and dirt annihilated the boundaries among them, thus
“the land itself no longer appear[ed] as an interface” between the inside
and outside of their home, “but as a vaguely defined zone of admixture and
intermingling.”22
   Re-using discarded material like tires was another way of entangling
things together to generate new forms of life. Within contemporary Western
culture, garbage is generally perceived to be a source of unease, disease, and
contamination.23 Within our homes we routinely separate new material,
which we store inside, from discarded stuff, which we relegate outside in
the name of disposability and cleanliness. By re-using, however, we actualize
the potential of discarded material to generate new relations.24 So by using
discarded tires, Hélène and Alain “restore[d] these things to life,”25 return-
ing them to a space where their material qualities could still be functional
and productive.
   It is by a logic of inversion, Ingold26 has argued, that most of us have
become accustomed to living life as if it was “reduced to an internal prop-
erty of things that occupy the world but do not properly inhabit it.” It is
by this logic that most of us occupy homes already built for us. A home
that is built for us and merely occupied by us is a home “furnished with
already existing things27” that power it and fuel it. In contrast, a home of the
kind woven by Hélène and Alain was bound together—knotted into place
from the strands of the continual coming into being of the living materials
entangled into it. It was a place of habitation, not mere occupation. It was a
constantly regenerative building, as Hélène herself pointed out: a building
(as the gerund denotes) always open to becoming entangled in new ways,
with new materials, in novel formations. Buildings like these were “living
things”28 continuously generating new forms of life, contributing through
their evolving weaves to forging new relations, new connections, and new
growth.29
                            House-Building, DIW-Style                            131
Regenerative Life Skills
Autumn had made a gentle and slow return in 2012. Daily temperatures
in the Outaouais were well into the high teens30 and the maples had only
lazily begun to turn a leaf. Reds were not quite yet ruby, yellows still shied
from amber, and greens only hinted at burnt umber. While it wasn’t the
main arboreal event we’d hoped to attend, the deciduous spectacle was still
beguiling enough for our evergreen-accustomed eyes.
     Michèle and Gilles had given us plenty of early warnings about reach-
ing their home. It was a very steep and unpaved hill, they cautioned us,
cragged enough that only a 4 × 4 could conquer it. Even though I was
behind the wheel of a gritty Jeep, I felt on the edge. While Jon navigated
the GPS with our withering cellular signal, I strove to shift the auto-
matic stick into lower gear. And then, the asperous monster appeared in
front of us.
     While by then we’d seen our fair share of remote properties way back
in the bush, we hadn’t yet seen anything like this, er, “driveway.”xi I floored
the gas pedal. A few meters later suddenly the road disappeared. All we
could see was the crown of the trees around us and the late September sky.
The climb felt like a jumbo jet’s take off. Somehow, we landed unscathed.
The road was so precipitous, Michèle and Gilles later recounted, that when
they had to deliver long pieces of construction lumber they had to back up
all the way, or otherwise the gravity would pull them down from the beds
of pick-up trucks. Altering the landscape to form hairpin turns would have
clashed with their values.
     Atop, the site was idyllic. Water was free and plentiful around their prop-
erty, locally harvested timber kept their woodstove lit, and a photovoltaic
system provided them with the electricity they needed. “I’m not a fan of
big company control on grids,” Gilles remarked. “You’re vulnerable to them,
they control what you’re going to pay, and the system is always on the edge if
you get bad weather.” There was a feeling of “self-empowerment” that came
from being independent from Hydro Quebec, one of the most powerful
utilities on the continent.
     Besides independence, Gilles and Michèle were drawn to the mountain
by a deep connection with the place.
     “Up here you can breathe,” said Michèle.
     “She wanted the view and the feeling of being on top of a mountain,”
Gilles interjected.
     “Down below it feels suffocating, overwhelming.”
xi.
132                   House-Building, DIW-Style
   How they found this place was a story in itself. Property-hunting d    ­ uring
a Sunday drive they saw a hawk flying low above a rural road. They felt
compelled to follow it. It was as if the hawk was leading the way, revealed
Michèle—who had aboriginal blood and was keenly sensitive to this sym-
bolism. The hawk finally stopped, of all places, right by a “For Sale” sign.
They immediately bought the 25 acres, made space for their home on top
of the plateau, and eventually started building. They had been at it for three
years and aimed to be finished—if a house can ever be finished—in two
years’ time.
   Michèle, a natural health practitioner, designed the house.
   “How did you . . . I mean, natural health practitioners don’t get training
in architectural design, do they?”
   “I do what I do,” she laughed.
   By taking an interest in the subject and by using a blend of logic and
intuition they found a way to get started. They learned the rest along
the way, discussing things together. Not everything was the fruit of their
own labor. They hired a friend to help with electrical components and
a small crew to help Gilles with framing, though “they put the rafters
on backwards and Gilles and I had to turn them all around,” Michèle
grinned.
   Self-reliance—however relative—felt liberating. The sense of accom-
plishment and responsibility they drew from taking care of their own needs
put them in touch with the place they called home.
   “You need to understand your needs and wants,” and what “the avail-
able sources of satisfaction are,” they observed. “When you understand all
that, then you need to realize how much work it takes to gratify them, and
whether you should, and whether you are able to, or not.” All this wisdom
came from careful toil and exploration,xii and from working with the land,
they pointed out.
   “I know every corner of this place,” Gilles observed as we lazily followed
a meandering path under a thick canopy of maples and young birches.
   “And because it’s yours I imagine you want to preserve it, right?” I
prompted him.
   “We don’t say it’s ours,” Michèle gently corrected me. “We don’t think
that way. We’re simply the caretakers of it, for a very short period of time.”
   Off-grid home builders like Michèle and Gilles were neither DIYers, nor
professional architects, nor carpenters. Rather, as Michèle beautifully put it,
they were simply people keen on learning how to build and live with a place,
that is, with the potential for life that a place made available. This principle,
fundamental to the idea of dwelling, building, and habitation,31 is central to
the architectural tradition of regenerative design.
                            House-Building, DIW-Style                                   133
      Regenerative design is a type of environmental architectural design
founded around the principle of ongoing renewal and rebirth.32 Late
Canadian architect John Lyle33 famously explained that regenerative design
“provides for continuous replacement” of energy resources, fuels, construc-
tion material, and organic life “through its own functional processes of the
energy and materials used in its operation.” Regenerative design hinges on
cyclical flows that “maintain themselves by renewal,” in the words of John
Dewey34—one of the philosophical sources of inspiration behind this tradi-
tion. Regenerative design systems integrate natural and social processes by
making minimum use of non-renewable resources and by maximizing the
use of renewable fuels, energy, and building materials and by striving to
facilitate the re-assimilation of waste into the environment via re-use, recy-
cling, and reduction.35 Advocates of this design view ecology as a process:
a “dynamic living assemblage”36 whose structural, functional, and spatial
ordering, disordering, and reordering patterns generate renewal via mecha-
nisms of conversion, distribution, filtration, assimilation, and storage.
      Like other off-gridders, Michèle and Gilles understood these ideas heu-
ristically and practiced them carefully. Building their home had been an
open-ended exercise in exploring and getting to know the land they had
chosen, learning about its potential for enabling the way of life they wanted
to practice, and respecting the local eco-system. Gathering knowledge on
the local microclimate, for instance, allowed them to understand the ideal
building site, the necessary details of their passive solar design, and how
their life needs could be met by locally available resources. This was a pro-
cess of logic and intuition as well as trial and error: a “gradual filling up of
capacities and shutting down of possibilities.”37 Home building for them
was therefore a regenerative path toward creating and re-creating conditions
to keep life ongoing, toward “finding a way through the myriad of things
that form, persist and break up in its currents.”38
      To build a home like they did required skill—this much was obvious. But,
surprisingly, off-gridders never seemed to acquire their skills from techni-
cal institutes where knowledge was conventionally distributed. Their skills,
instead, arose from observation and from learning as they went. This was
typical of their regenerative design, which began from practicing utmost
respect toward life’s inherent potential to renew itself. It was also some-
thing typical of the idea of habitation—according to which life-generating
and regenerating skills consist of “growing” into the lifeworld, rather than
transforming it, or of simply playing a part in the “world’s transforma-
tion of itself ”39 and establishing the conditions for “ongoing growth and
xii.
134                          House-Building, DIW-Style
development.”40 How to build and inhabit a home, and especially an off-
grid home, in the end might have been truly a simple thing. It might have
simply been a case of “letting nature do the work.”41
       Regenerative design and principles of habitation are the antinomy of DIY.
Rather than conceiving building as the expression of a self-contained, indepen-
dent mind that imposes a pre-conceived manual-like or blueprint-like design
on a pliable world, these philosophies embrace the view that building and habi-
tation are a way of working with the land. Off-grid building and habitation
skills, therefore, seemed less an expression of prior knowledge than capacities
generated and regenerated in the course of interacting with a continuously
unfolding eco-system. Skills of this kind were thus regenerative life skills “arising
as emergent properties of the fields of relationship set up through [builders’]
presence and activity within a particular environment.”42 These skills—rather
than generalized know-how, prescriptive techniques, or deductions—were
embodied, sentient capabilities to engage with, and relate to, an environment and
the inanimate materials, animate beings, and becomings inhabiting it.
Vernacular Architecture
“So, how exactly do we get back down now?” I asked Gilles when our visit ended.
       “Going down is the easy part. Gravity will take care of you.”
       Encouraging. Luckily we didn’t have to tumble too far. Their neighbor,
John,xiii also lived off-grid and he was our next stop.
       John, a tall and lean bilingual in his late fifties, was working on his house
when we stopped our fall and spilled out of the car.
       “Phillip? Jon? You made it. Would you guys like a coffee?”
       A few minutes later we were sipping a delicious stovetop brew, comfort-
ably chatting away on John’s deck as a jet flew far overhead to Montreal’s
Trudeau Airport—a reminder that there indeed was a world beyond the
hills and the lakes of this quiet land.
       John had lived in that distant world for most of his life. In 2003, fed up
with the anonymity and the frenzy of the city, he and his wife Guylaine
decided to purchase this property and build their dream home here, 3 kilo-
meters away from the nearest utility pole. “That’s when Hydro Quebec gave
me an estimate of $300,000 to connect to the grid,” he chronicled with an
aggravated smirk. With a background in law practice and a successful career
in urban administration, John had no serious backwoods living experience
or construction knowledge. But that didn’t intimidate him. It’s about “not
sweating the details . . . it’s about the beauty of the process,” he reflected.
xiii.
                            House-Building, DIW-Style                         135
      First, John and Guylaine had to solve an exhausting legal boundary dis-
pute with a corporate neighbor. Then, they had to bushwhack their way to
the site. During winter the only option was to ski in. When spring arrived
and the snow finally melted they had to carry building material in a trailer
dragged by an off-road Jeep—getting stuck in the mud at nearly every turn.
And until they managed to build a second43 bridge over a nearby creek—with
the help of family, friends, and neighbors—they had to carry construction
material on their backs while they waded waist-deep through the cold waters.
For the last two years now they had finally been able to sleep inside the home.
It still wasn’t quite finished but at least it was warm enough. Before the insu-
lation was completed, the temperatures inside would hover between 2°C and
10°C (36°F and 50°F) on a good winter day. “It was so cold,” John confided,
“I had to have the cat sleep on top of me to warm me up.”
      The outside was something to behold. The gray, rough, rock façade looked
as if it had been plucked away from the Scottish Highlands and transplanted
here. It turns out it was. This particular area was settled by Scots, so John
wanted to build a house that looked like it “belonged here,” as if it had
“grown”xiv in this place. But there was also another, more practical, reason for
using rock as building material. The rock, coming from a nearby quarry, was
remarkably easy to work with. Initially bent on building with cordwood, he
thought he’d experiment first with that technique by building his workshop.
It didn’t work well. Significant gaps formed between the wood and the mor-
tar due to the wood’s shrinking. While a vapor barrier could have solved the
insulation problem, he eventually selected rock because of its vernacular value
and superior workability over other options, such as timber framing. “It was
a style for a house that I could build myself,” he explained. “I didn’t have the
time and the skill to build a full timber frame myself. I had built furniture
before but my joinery is not so fancy. So I built post and beam by substituting
rock for cordwood between the posts.”
      “And how exactly does one go from building furniture to building a house?”
      John laughed. “I enjoy it. You have to enjoy it to learn. I started by mak-
ing furniture when I was in university. Oh, and I built a spice rack in shop
class in school too! It starts with little things,” he continued, by “putting
something together physically.” Learning gradually more complex lessons
creates the confidence necessary to tackle bigger projects. “You read tons of
books too, but it’s about growing experience.”
      Building was a form of growth. He simply “improvised” along the way,
beginning from a loose sketch. Later on Guylaine convinced him to hire a pro-
fessional to draw a building plan so that construction could go on even in his
xiv.
136                      House-Building, DIW-Style
occasional absence (some contractors were hired to help out with stonemasonry,
installation of the solar system, and to put shingles on the sharply pitched roof ).
After all, “there are some things you can’t do by yourself,” he acknowledged, but
a little bit of passion and resourcefulness can build skills fast.
    DIW builders like John acquired their skills in a number of different
ways. Most often they learned as they went, through exploration or “way-
finding.”44 Wayfinding took form as a stop-and-go process of practical and
open-ended problem solving, similar to the process of ordinary repair and
troubleshooting.45 Family and friends with relevant knowledge were also
common sources for skill acquisition.46 A loose body of historical tradition
transmitted through collective memory also often played an important role,
as was obviously the case with John’s home. Vernacular architecture—the
tradition of building with place-specific resources, style, and knowledge47—
was not only a mechanism for the acquisition of useful skills, but also
another important way through which builders “did it” with others. Far from
mere DIY, learning from others and from the places and unique eco-systems
where homes were built was a significant way in which off-grid builders
regenerated—or gave birth againto—traditional styles and techniques.
    DIW builders’ dedication and passion also revealed how the acquisition
of regenerative skills is something that can be relished. “You have to enjoy”
building to do it well, in John’s words. Craft—the making or fashioning of
material through the exercise of skill, knowledge, and judgment—is in fact
an important vehicle for self-expression, passion, creativity, mastery, and the
will to accomplish.48 Learning to enjoy craft is not easy within a hyper-
specialized consumer society in which armies of professionals are available
at our fingertips to make our lives easier and our learning of new skills
unnecessary. However, the practical skills acquired, refined, and applied in
the process of off-grid home building were at the basis of what many schol-
ars would view as essential to the shaping of a creative cultural economy.49
These skills also had “much in common with sustainability and environ-
mentalism”50 and, like these broader ways of envisioning the world, they had
a definite orientation toward regenerating people’s relationships with place.
    Regenerative life skills had several properties.51 They were intentional and
functional since they were immanent in the nature of practices themselves.
They were personal and temporal rather than abstract and universal, as they
demanded the engagement of care, judgment, passion, and resolve as well
as the application of vernacular lessons. They were practical and emergent,
because they arose from the process of hands-on learning, troubleshooting,
problem solving, and wayfinding. They were non-representational in the
sense that they did not take place by a mechanical unfolding of a preformed
vision but rather took form as they grew following the generative poten-
tial of the relations they were enmeshed within. Furthermore, regenerative
                        House-Building, DIW-Style                             137
life skills were relational since they depended on establishing relationships
among people, places, times, and materials.
    Skills were also creative—not in the sense that they constituted highly
original contributions to the history of a civilization and the received artistic
tradition—but in the sense that they resided in the capacity to tackle novel
challenges in response to life’s contingencies.52 Buildings affect those who live,
play, and work within them.53 When builders and dwellers are the same person,
a builder-inhabitant has the creative opportunity to infuse a dwelling with a
very personally meaningful affective resonance. John’s intentionality in giving
form to a building that “fit” the local environment revealed a remarkable ver-
nacular creativity54 influenced by his particular vision of being and living. This
vision of being and living—for John as well as other off-gridders—connoted a
profound closeness with place. His was a form of creativity that did not impose
a vision on an abstract space, in other words, but rather a form of vernacular
creativity that regenerated the natural potential of place.
    Regenerative skills demanded the application of improvisation and intuition,
because building must be continuously attuned to place-specific conditions, the
performance of others involved, and the response of materials employed. Like
other off-grid builders, John used intuition to apprehend the consequences of
a vision unspecified by a clear blueprint or architectural design. He also used
improvisation to address the “conditions of a world in formation.”55 Through
their creativity, intuition, and improvisation off-grid home builders did not
manifest any kind of extraordinary genius. Rather, they simply exercised their
capacity to keep life going by knitting together the common entanglements
that everyday living demanded, making and re-making their homes and their
places while at the same time making and re-making themselves.56
                                       ***
We spent the night at John and Guylaine’s and departed on a sunny morn-
ing. After a few hours we reached the city of Gatineau. It was lunchtime
so we crossed the bridge into downtown Ottawa in search of an English
pub. After spending nearly a week off-the-grid, our subdued nation’s capital
assaulted our senses like a runaway train. Culture-shocked and rattled, we
sped back to the bush and paddled the rest of the way on a placid lake sepa-
rating our newest off-grid cabin from the madness of urban noise, traffic,
lights, and speed. We opened a beer and spent the rest of the day working
on our notes, recordings, and reflections and relishing the last shimmers of
sunshine before autumn’s overdue arrival. Next morning, we’d reach our last
interviewee and then fly home before the rains began to pour.
    The regenerative life skills developed by off-gridders had taught us a
few important lessons. These lessons included using information and
138                       House-Building, DIW-Style
place-specific knowledge instead of interventionist, place-altering power;
benefiting from what nature freely provided and letting nature do the work;
matching technology and building design to actual need; searching for mul-
tiple pathways to a building problem; prioritizing sustainability; drawing
from lessons from the past; adjusting the form of one’s home to the existing
characteristics of place and the flows occurring within it; and aggregating
rather than isolating.57 Building a home was not an exercise in imposing
one’s solitary vision and will on an object, but rather was an ensemble of
sensitive practices resulting in numerous open-ended entanglements.
     Quebec had dramatically changed, if not the direction of our research,
then our attitude toward off-grid living in general. Ever since the first trips
across the water on the West Coast we knew that off-gridders sought to
live a better life, and that they regularly succeeded in doing so. The doubts
sparked throughout our journeys in Ontario and Manitoba—our misgivings
about the potential of off-grid living to make a global difference beyond
the separate little safe havens of peace and quiet in which it took place—
were beginning to dissipate. Sure not everyone could muster the necessary
physical capacities and easily acquire the skills to build their own house, but
re-inventing comfort and convenience and re-imagining our rapport with
place was something in which we could all take heed.
     According to Ingold,58 life is a “creative unfolding of an entire field of
relations within which beings emerge and take the particular forms they do,
each in relation to the others.” Life, in other words, contains the potential for
its own regeneration. Our capacity to give continuous re-birth to ourselves
and to the forms of our activity must therefore consist in harnessing those
unfolding processes and carrying them forward. Regenerative life skills—
which off-gridders across the country were teaching us—were thus first and
foremost about the “education of attention”59 toward meanings immanent
in the lifeworld. “Only if we are capable of dwelling,” as Martin Heidegger
might put it, “only then we can build.”60


9 Slower Homes

   Rhythm: Patterned Movement Re-Occurring at Regular or Irregular Intervals.
The Atlantic had ebbed, just as the tables foretold, and temporarily
undressed the tall shore from its mantle of water and silt. Now free to be
seen, massive slabs of rock strangely clothed in layers of tangerine earth
and shrouded by a flimsy coat of snowy powder leapt perpendicularly
out of the pebbly beach. Near their apexes an unkempt plumage of ever-
greens hung askew, clinging to migrant topsoil wondrously blown over
with westerly winds. Closer to the coarse and dark sand at the bottom,
the motley-shaped pillars revealed painfully rough striations, as if reced-
ing cold waters had left hurtful algae and other nameless creatures to
wound and tear away at their uneasy foundations. Standing at the cliff ’s
edge, Jon and I were the only audience to the semi-diurnal ritual that the
low tide performed that morning at Alma. On a summer day, the Bay of
Fundy would have drawn thousands of spectators peering at the lunar-
driven aqueous fluctuations from behind their digital viewfinders, but on
that gray December day the blowing snow had kept even the park warden
close to his warm hearth.
   Bay of Fundy tides consist of 100 billion tonnes of seawater flooding
and ebbing, rising up to 50 feet in height, then falling, twice daily. They are
the mightiest in the world. Despite all their natural strength, their poten-
tial for energy generation remains largely untapped. Cupping my hands
and blowing warm breath on them, I recalled a few off-gridders who would
                                     141
142                                 Slower Homes
have gladly put them to work. But, alas, tides are entirely unexploited by
Canadian off-gridders; too much infrastructure, too many regulations, too
many headaches stand in the way. And yet, the regular rhythm that tides
keep did strike a familiar chord with off-gridders and the two of us alike.
Here one minute, gone the next. Back at it again, and away they went one
more time.
      Natural rhythms—of tides, clouds, sun, moon, atmospheric masses, or
else—are no noteworthy events for most of us. Natural rhythms, especially
of the seasonal and meteorological kind, however, affected Canadian off-
grid homes very differently. Energy-independent households that relied on
photovoltaic and wind power may not have been too badly affected by a
couple of cloudy or windless days in a row, but whenever still and tenebrous
systems of low pressure lingered, things got hairy. Off-grid homes used
batteries to store electricity collected during propitious days, but batteries
were no magic wand. Batteries were very expensive and fickle: they disliked
being drained and could die early as a result. And though backup genera-
tors worked as somewhat of an insurance policy against bad weather, for the
most part off-gridders tried relentlessly to minimize their use. A courageous
few did not even own one at all. The day before, in fact, we had met such a
Spartan couple.
      Capable of generating a miniscule 300 watts on a bright sunny day, having
no source of electricity other than twelve 50-watt photovoltaic panels,ii and
relying on neither generator nor propane, Debbieiii and David could have
easily qualified for the Olympics in the minimalist off-grid living event. We
had arrived at their farm home on a cold but sunny Sunday afternoon. Lying
near the top of a gently rising and mostly treeless hill, their south-facing
home cast its gaze at one of Atlantic Canada’s largest cities. You couldn’t
quite see it or hear it, even on a sunny day like this, but Fredericton was
close and within commuting distance for Debbie, who owned an organic
food store there. The couple had lived off-grid in their 1,200-square-foot
home on a 125-acre organic farm for 20 years. Philosophies of local, slow,
and healthy food, environmental sustainability, and renewable energy ran
deep in their blood.
      We sat down to talk at the living room table, nibbling on some munch-
ies and bathing in the warm sun. Soft-spoken, even a touch timid, David
and Debbie were well past their younger years but were unafraid of hard
ii.
Brunswick_04.jpg
iii.
Brunswick_07.jpg
                                   Slower Homes                                143
physical work. “We cut most of our wood ourselves,” David said, “so we
don’t need to join the gym.” Passive solar design and two cords of locally
collected wood per year were all they needed to reach thermal comfort.
To put it in perspective, three cords of wood per year and 300 watts were
about a tenth of what a typical home might consume in the area. “We just
can’t help marvelling at how inefficient people’s homes can be,” remarked
Debbie.
     Most of the firewood was burned in a masonry stove that served as the
hearth of the house, connecting the kitchen, the living room, and the din-
ing room area. Its heat naturally rose, and so the masonry stove warmed
their upstairs bedroom as well. Masonry stoves were heavy, laborious to
assemble, and expensive to buy but they made it all up in efficiency by emit-
ting copious amounts of warmth and by serving as a cooker as well. In
David and Debbie’s home the masonry stove was in fact the sole cooking
appliance—neither a propane-fueled range nor a microwave oven was avail-
able. Propane, after all, was a non-renewable gas, and microwaves—we were
told—were not only gluttons for wattage, but also environmentally unsus-
tainable because of the materials used to build them.
     The unique setup, of course, created the conditions for some slow cook-
ing in the kitchen. “It takes about 15 minutes to fire up the stove and get
the water boiling for tea,” Debbie explained. But when the stove was on, it
could also double as a hair drier. Blow driers were a tremendous electricity
draw, which their system could not handle. “In the summer the sun will do
the job,” long-haired Debbie had remarked with a peaceful smile.
     Their pint-sized electricity system also meant they needed to be inven-
tive when it came to refrigeration. Canadian off-gridders could generally
get away from having to plug in a refrigerator by placing a thickly insulated
ice box outdoors, or simply in an unheated room in the north side of the
house, but Debbie and David had a more uncommon solution: a California
cooler.iv The California cooler was invented and popularized in the Golden
State in the early 1900s, before refrigerators became common household
items. California coolers are essentially cabinets that bring in cool air from
the outside through wall vents. The cabinet door is heavily insulated to
keep the cold air in and to prevent the warm indoor air from leaking inside.
­Temperatures within their California cooler never reached freezing level,
 but this did not constitute a problem for the couple, who were both vegetar-
 ian and did not need to keep meat frozen.
iv.
Brunswick_07.jpg
144                             Slower Homes
    Debbie and David were busy, but they did not live hurried lives. Their
everyday rhythms were simple: “We rise with the sun and go to bed early at
night,” David told us. “Summer days are longer and busier with farming,”
David found. “When you live off-grid you really change your routines with
the movements of the sun; you can’t be in a rush.” While Debbie could work
in town up to five days a week, their home was in a temporal space removed
from the rhythms of the city. The limited electricity available meant there
was no computer in the home, no internet, no satellite TV. “We have four
channels and VHS,” David showed us with a hint of pride in his voice.
    Back at Alma, embattled by the wind, Jon and I gave up on the idea of
waiting for the tide to rise again. We retreated to our car with our lunchtime
parking lot special and revisited our fresh handwritten notes—the only trace
remaining from David and Debbie’s interview after our recording technol-
ogy had spectacularly failed to work.
    “Do you think you have just about everything now?” Jon asked me after
remembering and dictating yet another quote almost verbatim from the day
before.
    “I think I do,” I answered, still reeling from the discovery of the disastrous
breakdown, a snafu that—as it turned out—had also affected three other
previous interviews.
    “What are we doing with these interviews in New Brunswick?”
    “Time. Rhythm.” I answered laconically. “There are several theorists
that have lamented the consequences of the increased speed of modern
lifestyles.”
    Most notably, geographer David Harvey1 has outlined the existence of a
“time-space compression” facilitated by technologies that make seemingly
everything available almost anytime and anywhere. Similarly, Nigel Thrift2
has argued that speed is imbricated in the same assemblages that have
brought light and power to the modern world. Electricity grids, natural gas
pipelines, communication networks, airways, railways, and motorways have
left indelible marks on the timescapes of modernity and shaped the very
nature of capitalism, democracy, and everyday life.3
    “So, we’re saying that off-grid living is a critical response to all that.”
    “Definitely,” I replied, “one of many. Like slow tourism,4 slow food,5 and
slow urban living.”6
    In fact, as others have observed, “hurry sickness, as a response to the
acceleration of just about everything, has become a recognizable late mod-
ern malaise.”7 Slow food, slow urban dwelling, and slow tourism represent a
multi-faceted set of responses to speed, involving the deliberate renegotia-
tion of the different rhythms that make up our quotidian existence. “Slow
living,” as Wendy Parkins8 has noted, derives from “a commitment to occupy
                              Slower Homes                                 145
time more attentively,” investing time “with significance through attention
and deliberation,” and “engaging in ‘mindful’ rather than ‘mindless’ practices”
in order to “differentiate [our]selves from the dominant culture of speed.”
The slowness of off-grid homes had clearly much in common with these
trends.
   The slowness of off-grid homes hinged on a unique factor, however:
their relation to weather and seasonality. In the off-grid lifeworld, the sky’s
rhythms were a concrete and lived occurrence as well as a planned-for
affective possibility: a space of anticipation.9 In other words, if today the
sky was overcast David and Debbie would act accordingly in order to draw
less power and have some more left over for tomorrow. But the sky affected
off-gridders’ conduct even on a sunny or windy day. By anticipating the
occurrence of gloomy weather and short winter days, off-gridders care-
fully conserved their stored power and “splurged” only when their batteries
could no longer accommodate any further charge. Their anticipation took
weather and seasonal rhythms into account as both continuous and repeti-
tive events as well as indefinite and less foreseeable occurrences—rhythm
after all is both repetition and difference.10 As a result, natural rhythms
were deeply woven into off-gridders’ everyday consciousness and acted as a
slowing-down factor on their way of life.
   “I think we can see the strength of natural rhythms even more clearly in
homes like David and Debbie’s,” observed Jon as he, habitually, wrapped and
set away for later half of his uneaten sandwich.
   “You mean because they have no backup generator?”
   “And a small solar system too,” he added, while he switched his attention
to our itinerary on his iPhone.
   Running out of stored power was practically improbable for most,
if not all, off-gridders. But what truly affected their energy conserva-
tion was not the prospect of a blackout in and of itself, but its affective
significance. To run out of power, even for an hour, would have been
equivalent to getting caught unprepared, unskilled, and unable to prac-
tice self-sufficiency.
   “You know what’s interesting about people like David and Debbie?” I
mumbled. “They’re not scared into conserving energy because they fear run-
ning out of it. It’s not fear that motivates them. It’s their lifestyle, their
beliefs. They think that there is enough renewable energy available to live a
good life and so they feel they should make do. It’s like an adaptive mecha-
nism. Like trying to fit life to what nature provides and when it provides it,
rather than the other way around, like most of us do.”
   “Yes. But speaking of rhythms, we should get going,” Jon reminded me.
“We have a long drive ahead of us.”
146                           Slower Homes
It’s Sunny. Tell the Kids They Can Come Inside and Play the Wii
Wendy was waiting for us at a busy gas station a few kilometers away from
her home. “I won’t bother you with impossibly complicated directions,” she
had wisely suggested. We followed her car home through slowly winding
country lanes connected by wooden bridges. The snow had stopped falling,
but it was a caliginous, foggy, damp day and the light and warmth begotten
by the Franklin stove she immediately lit as we stepped in was dearly wel-
comed by the three of us. Like all off-gridders, Wendy was very mindful of
the electricity draw of her appliances. She had efficiently placed the refrig-
erator away from the kitchen, far from the woodstove and other sources of
heat, and her freezer out in the garage. She owned no TV set, no toaster, no
microwave oven, no coffee machine, no bread maker. Her tidy kitchen coun-
ter was barer than an airstrip cleared for landing. She also tended to “live in
the dark a lot,” she admitted with a smile as we began to set up. “Actually,”
she wondered politely, “would it be ok if we switched off that light?” Because
we were video recording we sheepishly begged for her indulgence.
    Wendy had been living alone at her house since 2004, though she had
been “camping” onsite for nine years prior to that. Moving in permanently
felt like an escape. “I could hardly function anymore in the city,” she dis-
closed. Unlike David and Debbie’s, Wendy’s 1.5-kW solar system was
rather typical for an off-grid home. Modern life “is not sustainable,” she
answered when I asked her why she lived off-grid. “I just don’t think it’s
necessarily good that you can turn on a switch and have everything at your
fingers. And I like the quiet and peacefulness of it,” she added. Her home
was in fact a retreat from the busyness of her “crazy life.” Wendy served
as the executive director of a not-for-profit council and regularly logged
60- and 80-hour weeks, sometimes more. Yet, most of those hours were
spent in the safe haven of her home, where she could simultaneously be
attending a phone conference and pickling vegetables grown right here in
her garden.
    Despite the demands of her work and the fact that her i­ nternet-connected
computer was plugged in virtually all the time, her life rhythms were
undoubtedly measured. While it could be a challenge to accomplish every-
thing she wished to, she still made time for gardening and for ritually stroll-
ing along the beautiful river that coasted her property. The sun imposed a
definite sense of structure on her personal time too.
    “Every day I get up and check what the weather is going to do, and decide
what I am going to do accordingly, if it’s possible.”
    “For example?” I asked, as I double-checked that all three of our recorders
were working this time.
                              Slower Homes                                 147
    “Well, if it’s a sunny day and my batteries are charged up then I’ll do
laundry. Otherwise all that power goes to waste, and I hate that. But I’d
never do my laundry on a day like today.” We had heard similar examples
of efficiency before, elsewhere. Dark days were not the most propitious
for washing machines, vacuum cleaners, power tools, or toasters. Some
off-grid families were especially pugnacious about getting the most out
of a bright day: after the point at which batteries could accommodate no
further charge, excess power could even be dumped on frivolous things
like video games.
    For people like Wendy—motivated by environmental values, self-­
sufficiency, and the sense of challenge—back-up generators represented a
last resort. Running a generator was a bit like getting a push on the steepest
hill of a bicycle race: though the help was badly needed, it was something
to be bashful about. Turning on the generator carelessly “would defeat the
purpose,” remarked Wendy. “I hate every time I turn it on because I know
what it’s really doing to the atmosphere.” Making sunlight’s power last,
then, became a trial in curtailing personal needs and wants, and in master-
ing the “little things” that allowed for reductions in power consumption—
starting by challenging dominant ideas of efficiency. “It’s a fallacy that
all these little pluggable gadgets can save time and energy,” she observed.
Saving time and energy was more about being organized, being skilled,
and doing with less. “Simpler is more efficient.”
    In common talk efficiency is synonymous with ease and speed, but in
the off-grid world efficiency denoted primarily something else: a more
technical meaning relating the ratio of energy produced to the amount of
energy invested. This is not to say that ease and speed were irrelevant to
off-gridders, but rather that they were only desirable insofar as they cost no
excessive expenditure of renewable energy. This meant that off-grid living
was practiced at a distinct pace, a pace that was discernibly slower than grid-
connected homes where connectivity, mobility, and availability of electricity
were not dependent on sunlight, wind, or locally stored energy.
    Consequently, different seasons tended to make different demands and
opened distinct opportunities. “Winters are hard and you have to be really
careful,” Wendy found. “The days are so short and you have to be mindful
of how you use your power.” So, “If there are things that require light to be
done then I’ll do them in the daytime rather than at night when I would
have to turn the lights on.” Winter also brought on unique chores. Atlantic
Canada regularly receives a lot of snow from November to April, and during
those times snowfall accumulates on solar panels and solar hot water col-
lectors, blocking ultraviolet rays. Removing the shadowing white stuff was
as simple as brushing it off, but it required attention and physical presence.
148                           Slower Homes
Needless to say off-gridders generally found it difficult to leave their homes
unattended for tropical winter getaways.
    The “decompression” present in the atmospheres of off-grid homes was
palpable, and off-gridders knew better than to take it for granted. As a mat-
ter of fact, they methodically took into reflexive account how quickly they
could have accomplished things if they had been on the grid, and how dif-
ferent their lives could have been otherwise. Their relational position high-
lighted the conscious efforts they constantly made to slow down and to live
in synchrony with the natural and technological patterns in which their lives
were entangled. From the number of watts hour their batteries could last, to
the number of daylight hours in a winter day, off-gridders were intimately
aware of the temporal dynamics of their power constellations in a way most
of us are not.
    Off-gridders performed a deliberate deceleration in their everyday
lives. The durations of their chores tended to be longer and their pace of
life seemed to be less hurried than most. Theirs were discordant speeds,
rhythms, and durations that posed “alternative modes of spending time,
different pacings and pulses which critique[d] normative, disciplinary
rhythms and offer[ed] unconventional, sometimes utopian visions of dif-
ferent temporalities.”11
    But let us slow down ourselves and practice a bit of reflexivity too. I live
on the grid. Because I work from home my days are characteristically mel-
low. I write, I read, and whenever necessary I log on to the internet to con-
nect with the rest of the world. I make time to cook, grow food, play, enjoy
my island, and spend time with family and friends. And yet I am on the grid.
Other people have a similar-paced lifestyle, on-grid. So, did off-grid homes
truly live slower? And if so, slower than whom? And why? There is great
deal of research to help us figure this out.
    Broad social trends do point to the existence of a diffused time pressure,
but these trends are neither clear nor univocal.12 Feelings of stress, burnout,
and time poverty are on everyone’s mind these days, but people are not
necessarily busier than they were years ago. They simply feel busier,13 as
evidenced by mundane chitchat and by the commercial success of books
outlining these pressures, stresses, and their roots and consequences.14 Being
“busy” is nowadays a common excuse for everything. But why do we feel so
busy all the time?
    We like to think there are at least two reasons. First, increased media
connectivity has come to mean heightened expectations to be always “on”
and at the mercy of incoming digital information. These expectations have
begun to seriously colonize private times such as evenings and nights.15
“The drone is never-ending and ever-present,”16 and this can cause fatigue,
                              Slower Homes                                  149
frustration, and anxiety. Second, the blurring of daily, weekly, and seasonal
rhythms has manifested itself not only in private spaces but in public
domains as well. Electrification and the diffusion of lighting technology
have resulted in the progressive expansion of leisure, consumption, and
surveillance regimes into the night,17 almost obliterating darkness and the
times and spaces when people can be “off.” In this sense, the “unplugging”
typical of off-grid places and lifestyles (and even some on-grid ones) could
indeed be seen to be a discordant rhythm, and an alternate way of spending
time and making place.
   On the other hand we need to be careful. As said, a great deal of research
shows that people are not necessarily busier than they used to be. ­Theoretical
arguments that point to a uniform acceleration in the pace of everyday life
simplify both the present and the past, unquestioningly assuming the exis-
tence of halcyon days of unhurried synchrony between natural and social
rhythms and positing a clear shift to an industrial-style domesticity attuned
to the new 24/7 consumer economy. These are facile polemics.
   More critical and systematic research reveals instead that “natural and
commercial rhythms have co-evolved and often complemented each other
in the modern period,”18 thus highlighting the coexistence of multiple and
contradictory temporalities throughout history. “The great acceleration” was
neither as comprehensive nor as disorienting as it is sometimes assumed.19
Several historians have found that the diffusion of electricity, the acquisition
and domestication of labor-saving appliances, and the consequent “indus-
trialization of the home” were neither quick nor pervasive processes.20 To
say that social conditions have dramatically and uniformly changed with
successive stages of the electrification and digitization of private and public
spheres is nothing but a simplification of the case and an example of tech-
nological determinism.
   A brief look at how labor-saving technologies intersect with the tem-
poralities of different households confirms that domestic spaces are char-
acterized by multiple and diverse rhythms, and that speed and slowness
are no univocal phenomena. Even though appliances like microwave ovens,
toasters, refrigerators, dishwashers, freezers, tumble driers, cooking ranges,
and vacuum cleaners are customarily marketed for their potential to free
homemakers from the busyness of domestic work, the reality is that their
purchase, installation, operational demands, coordination, and the ways in
which they raise expectations for convenience, cleanliness, and good house-
work tend to nullify whatever time-saving effect they may have21—just like
Wendy opined. So, not having them—as was the case with off-gridders like
her—was not the decisive factor in their slowing down. But if that was not
the key difference, what was it then?
150                          Slower Homes
Synchronous Power and Unplugged Appliances
Sometimes ethnographic knowledge lies in the unsaid and the undone: in
the happenings that could’ve taken place but didn’t, in what could’ve been
otherwise.
   It was in the middle of a Saturday morning when we knocked on Marc’s
door. He welcomed us inside and offered us food. He had made brunch and he
was delighted to share his breakfast burritos. Though grateful, we declined—
the Holiday Inn Express had very recently treated us to stale cornflakes and
rubbery pancakes. Marc’s edge-of-the-city home was within easy reach of the
airport hotel strip where we had spent the night. In fact, from his suburban
home he commuted to his downtown business daily. But we’ve digressed;
Marc had made himself breakfast—this is the point we could fail to notice.
   As time feels more compressed, as dual-earning couples become busier at
work, as appliances continue promising to make food faster, as people spend
less time cooking and eating at home, Marc—a man, to boot—was prepar-
ing food from scratch. And not just for himself either. Within minutes of
our ingress his wife Vera, showed up. Then there came Sumira, their older
daughter, 15. Finally Jamuna, 12, their younger daughter walked downstairs
too. Each added to Marc’s meal and fixed up something to eat. Each nibbled
on what everyone else had prepared. And each made the time to sit down to
chat, not in their Acadian-inflected French—but in our preferred language
with us: two strangers from the other end of the country whose research
agenda should have ranked much lower in the weekend’s order of priorities.
It could all have gone very differently.
   Marc told us they had been off-grid for two years, but the dream had
inspired them for much longer. Vera grew up in Germany with the knowl-
edge that solar energy does work. Marc himself was intrigued with the phys-
ics of electricity and enchanted by the power of the sun. A sculpture of the
fiery star—made with recycled green wine bottles planted within the tan
kitchen wall of their cob house—seemed to bask in the recognition of their
trust and admiration. The sculpture lay where a TV screen or a microwave
might otherwise have been, atop where a dishwasher might have stood.
Again there was the telling absence of what could have been: the startling
lack of a TV or other appliances.
   And so inquired the wondering ethnographer: “How do you manage
without a microwave?”
   Quipped the witty younger daughter: “Microwaves are boring!”
   There were more absences. There could have been a sedan and an SUV
outside. Instead there was an equine friend neighing for our overdue atten-
tion, two compact cars, and an electric bike. “It’s about making choices,”
explained Marc, “our money has gone toward the lifestyle we prefer. Sure
                              Slower Homes                                   151
it wasn’t cheap to buy a four Kilowatt solar system, but it was the same
money that many people prefer to spend on a pick-up truck.” They could
have bought the truck instead. They could have driven it to Starbucks to
eat breakfast that morning. And they could have used the grid—which was
just across the driveway—to power up a microwave, an electric toaster, and
a couple of blow driers for all the long, blonde hair in the house. Instead,
“we live in abundance,” declared Marc as he finished off the last bite, “if you
want to promote energy conservation you shouldn’t scare people into having
to make sacrifices. You want to show them that what is already available is
more than enough to enjoy life.”
    Marc’s powerful insight made a great deal of sense about energy, and
it also resonated about another abundant resource: time. If you want to
promote a deeper appreciation of time—Marc might as well have said—
then you shouldn’t feel you’re missing out by not doing everything. Rather,
you want to feel that the time that’s already available to you is more
than enough to enjoy life. Most of us don’t feel that way, though. There’s
always another email to send off, another contract to take on, another
holiday to book, another class to join, another party to attend. And yet
there was an alternative, which off-gridders across the country passion-
ately practiced: a radically different way of cultivating time and slowing
down. “Less is more.” “What we have is enough.” “Take time to relish
the little things”—herein lay the basic difference we had sought. Slower
homes simply sought a different orientation to time and an alternative
disposition to life itself.
    Off-gridders were no meditative ascetics. They weren’t monastic masoch-
ists either. They were simply opportunists. The most common definition of
slow implies a chronometric shift: a reduction in speed. But the slower ways
of life typical of off-gridders showed the importance of another dimension
of slowness, one that was less based on chronos and more on kairos. Kairos
is a rhythmical movement. Kairos refers to an opportunistic or a propitious
time to do something.22 Off-gridders were opportunists because they chose
to become involved in certain activities at select moments in time in accor-
dance with the rhythms of the sky (that is, with the patterns of weather,
seasons, and availability of sunlight) and in strategic ways.
    Interestingly, the word opportunistic derives from the original denota-
tion of opportunus: a combination of ob- (“in the direction of ”) and portus
­(“harbor”)—in essence the condition of enjoying a favorable wind for sailing
 into port. Opportunistic, therefore, has come to refer to a skilled, knowledge-
 able, and clever person who seizes the right moment to achieve one’s goals.
 Off-gridders, then, were opportunistic in the sense of acting strategically
 while also being careful about sustaining themselves and their environment.
 Being opportunistic in their case meant being efficient too.
152                           Slower Homes
   Grid-connected electricity was to off-grid power what fast food is to slow
food. Whereas power is constantly, predictably, and uniformly available to
grid-connected homes, off-grid power availability was more irregular, more
intermittent, and more dependent on local conditions and resources. There
are exceptions to this distinction, of course. Rotating blackouts, unexpected
power outages due to inclement weather events, and other cuts in service
prove that even grid-connected homes do not live in a vacuum from the out-
side world. But these are exceptions to the norm, and the norm is that to a
great extent our on-grid power consumption occurs asynchronously, in a state
of relative disassociation from weather-driven ephemeral mutations of our
landscape. Off-grid homes on the other hand lived in a state of power syn-
chrony: their energy generation and consumption unfolded in sync with the
constantly changing availability of resources proximate to their surround-
ings. Power asynchrony and power synchrony meant radically different ways
of practicing efficiency, as well as different rhythms, different speeds, differ-
ent affects, different ways of assembling comfort and convenience.23
   Some ephemeral qualities of place are short-lived and irregular, like the
cloud formation obscuring the sky right here, right now. Others are sea-
sonal, like the different climatic periodicities of light and darkness across the
year at particular latitudes.24 As the weather and the seasons change, so do
light and darkness, and as light and darkness changed, so did the worlds of
power-synchronous home dwellers. Hence the cyclical rhythms of weather
and the rhythms of off-grid everyday life deeply intersected. Rhythms of
darkness and light were “a rhythmpattern of timespace”25 that meaningfully
shaped electricity use and everyday rhythms. While these rhythmpatterns
did not determine off-gridders’ behaviors, changing amounts of ultraviolet
rays interfered with off-gridders’ domestic practices by increasing or failing
to increase the amps they could deposit into their batteries. Light and dark-
ness, therefore, variously constrained and enabled off-gridders, becoming
embedded with their daily life over time, leading them “to follow particular
courses of action, and produce an everyday practical orientation toward their
taskscape.”26
   Thanks to batteries, power synchrony was only approximate. Synchrony
and asynchrony were variations along wide continua, yet these variations
were no less meaningful. While the oscillation of light due to the alterna-
tions of day and night, overcast and fair skies, and winter and summer does
affect us all, off-grid homes were more immediately impacted than the rest
of us. Darkness is easier to ignore when you can flick on a switch and turn
on an appliance powered by distant resources. Weather and seasonality, in
contrast, were key protagonists in off-gridders’ lives. The rhythms of the sun
rendered off-grid dwellings lively, in constant movement, in need of con-
tinuous synchronization with the outdoor world. Changing light patterns
                                  Slower Homes                                153
demanded that power-synchronous lives be “open to change through cae-
suras operating between the existing ecology and external elements, both
material and immaterial, human and non-human.”27
     Thanking Marc, Vera, and the girls for their hospitality and insights, we
headed farther east. To make more efficient use of our time, and to pollute
the sky a bit less, Jon and I had decided to cover neighboring New Bruns-
wick and Nova Scotia in one single swoop from the West Coast. We had a
looming kayaking date with Phil in Musquodoboit Harbour, near Halifax,
Nova Scotia, but since the weather and tide were not ready for our crossing,
we still had time for Jerry and Jo-Anne in New Brunswick.
New Age Homes for a New Millennium
After moving from pricey Alberta to affordable New Brunswick 19 years ago
in order to get over a family financial crisis, Jerry and Jo-Anne at first had to
resort to kerosene to light up their 14-year-old daughter’s bedroom. They
had now invested in a more powerful system. A four kW photovoltaic array
powered all the electricity needs of their stylish, self-built, 2,600-square-foot
multilevel home out in the country. Timber from their 20-acre property was
used for space heating, cooking, and heating water.
     “It’s a new age home for a new millennium,” Jo-Anne responded when I
asked her about efficiency.
     “What do you mean?”
     “Put it this way. We don’t need air conditioning because of the number
of windows. We have very efficient pumps. Our refrigerator, our appliances,
our stoves, and our cooking stove are very efficient. Our house is well insu-
lated. Even our generator is very efficient.”
     “Can you show me your most efficient technology?”
     Eagerly, they quickly rose from their indoor verandah and made a beeline
for the kitchen, where their “Cadillac stove”v shone before our eyes. “There
he is: Harley!” Jo-Anne beamed with satisfaction. The old-fashioned, coun-
try-style woodstove looked like it weighed a ton and was harder to operate
than a 1931 Cadillac Series 355, but it was seductively beautiful in a way
that only cars and stars from the celluloid era could be. It was also an inge-
nious, multi-purpose tool with a sharp character. Efficient meant resource
frugal, and the woodstove epitomized that thriftiness.
     Efficiency, in the off-grid lifeworld, was not about taking shortcuts to save
time. It was not about speed and constant availability of everything. It was
instead about investing time with care and exercising care over time. “This
v.
154                           Slower Homes
is a far more labor-intensive life,” declared Jo-Anne forcefully. The learning
curve was steep; patience, attention, mindfulness, and knowledge were all
crucial requirements. “This kind of home demands a lot more involvement,”
Jerry continued where she had left off, “you can’t come home after work
and turn the TV on and go to bed.” The house demanded you. “There is
no end in sight, there is always something to do,” he went on, “but work is
not a dirty word, work is something we do instead of watching TV, instead
of going to the mall to chit-chat with friends, instead of going on a cruise.”
    It was resource-consciousness, involvement, and care that made this
home efficient: a mix of old and new-age knowledge and values. Learning
old skills, like growing food, canning vegetables, living in tune with what-
ever the seasons allowed, was a simple way of anticipating the challenges
that the future holds for us. “Things have got to change,” concluded Jerry.
“I say this is a new-age home for a new a millennium,” Jo-Anne clarified,
“because we’re not a throwback to the past. This is the way of the future.”
    Power-synchronous spaces often separate the domestic environment
from the outside world. This detachment of the indoors from the outdoors
supposedly makes us feel secure, sheltered, and comfortable.28 Such separa-
tion of indoor and outdoor spaces is part and parcel of a general cultural
orientation that routinely treats nature and society/culture as separate.29
Power-synchronous homes did not treat the outside as an external back-
ground surface, but rather as an open space demanding direct involvement.
In power-synchronous dwellings, the sky and the energy bestowed by sun-
light were enmeshed in a “perpetual metabolism” that gave form to a hybrid
and intimate socio-nature.30 The sky and its light (or lack thereof ) therefore
became a place for everyday habitation, a going concern, a tool for everyday
living. This opportunistic way of being-in-the-world was a mode of habi-
tation that differed sharply from the mode of occupation typical of some-
one who may very well carry on ignoring the unfolding, dynamic, moody
weather of the day and its ever-changing patterns. Power synchrony was
a different orientation to time and place: a way of living life more “in the
open,” “within a weather-world in which every being is destined to combine
wind, rain, sunshine, and earth in the continuation of its own existence.”31
    Power synchrony demanded care for what went on in the weather world.
It required a sensibility toward changing levels, shapes, and shades of energy.
It expected a continual “attunement” with its imperative demands.32 It urged
a capacity for immersion in the changing cycles of light and darkness, in
the unfolding rhythms of the sky over the day, the week, and the seasons. It
compelled a capacity for temporal reflection: a “critical capacity for reflex-
ivity which is insisted upon as central to slowness.”33 The slower rhythms
of power-synchronous homes, therefore, arose out of a realization that the
inside and the outside were not separate, that the surfaces of a house—from
                              Slower Homes                                155
its windows to its solar panels, and from the vents to the roof—were not
boundaries but channels for the “comings and goings” of daily activities and
of the formations, movements, and fluctuations of a temporally evolving
landscape.34 In this sense, living slower, in greater synchrony with sunlight
and darkness, was a way of learning to be sensitive to the “vibrant matter” of
the lifeworld and the vitality of the things inhabiting the interface between
animate and inanimate life.35
    Energy “is always on the move, always going somewhere, though where
this will be is not entirely predictable.”36 Grids, however, limit that unpre-
dictability and as a result most of us have settled for rather reliable power
constellations that function in a seemingly independent way from diur-
nal, seasonal, and meteorological rhythms. Off-gridders, instead, chose to
synchronize their lives with the “turbulent matter”37 of these patterns to
a greater degree. Their homes, therefore, were in many ways more deeply
shaped by ephemeral qualities of place, more open to the continuous coming
into being of light and darkness, less enclosed by surfaces aiming to separate
them from the sky, and more “involved” and “engaged” with the “telluric,
celestial, and organic” agitations of matter.38 These were “new-age homes
for a new millennium,” if we are to believe Jo-Anne.
    Jo-Anne is right if we believe that our future will demand more sensi-
bility, more care, more involvement, and a greater attunement to the “vital
connections between the geo (earth) and the bio (life).”39 To become more
attuned to the “livingness of the world,” and to shift our attention from
indifference to intimate involvement, requires a new orientation: a disposi-
tion that is sensitive to the ways in which our everyday lives are imbricated
with lively matter and “co-fabricated” with the reverberations of the world.40
    Perhaps these slower, supposedly more efficient, power-synchronous
homes were utopian spaces. Maybe they were impractical experiments:
microscopic lifestyle enclaves reserved for a few brave souls, or perhaps
hopelessly romantic idealists. Or maybe they were the dawn of a new
enlightenment: one not so keen on sacrificing natural rhythms at the behest
of prepotent consumer desires. To be sure, we have no ultimate answer on
this, but after nine provinces and our fair share of questions, discoveries,
and doubts along the way, we knew that off-gridders—though they had no
pretense of having found the sustainable solution—had at least assembled
one path forward.
    Off-gridders had reminded us that, like “the grid,” the abstract clock
time of the 24/7 economy is potent, but it is something we can choose to
deselect. Most of us today “live with burgeoning temporal ecologies, which
we often misread or just ignore completely.”41 If we wish to become more
opportunistic, more efficient about energy production and consumption,
then we can no longer afford to ignore cosmic and climatic rhythms. If the
156                                  Slower Homes
future will call upon our civilization to diversify our energy resources and
to learn to rely more on renewables, then natural rhythms—from tides to
the sky and everything in between—will open “a potential for change for
everyday life to be interrupted and its organization to be changed.”42 A
renewed attention toward the rhythms of the “patterned” entanglements of
societies and natures43 such as the rhythmpatterns of sunlight, wind, and
power might then be one of the keys to regaining the sense of enchantment
and wonder necessary for the sustainable regeneration of everyday life.


10 Breaking Waters

Morning comes
we’re living inside a fridge
The radio batteries are frozen
and yesterday’s coffee
a brown layer of stone
The orange saved for breakfast
does not bounce
The wood stove is still asleep
and windows are frosted
like a stained glass church
You tell me
underneath your army surplus
double down sleeping bag
the emperor has no clothes
and that it’s my turn
to start the fire
Soon the tide will shift
the inlet ice
like continental drift
and we will be stranded
The floor makes exploding sounds
I hop in my cheap sleeping bag
rigid from the night’s early sweat
                               159
160                               Breaking Waters
          and with my axe
          try to break the water
          in our kettle
          It’s the Canadian thing to do.
                             (Philip K. Thompson, “The Cabin in Winter”)1
“Philip?”
      “Phillip with two l’s?”
      “Yes. Nice to meet you. And this is Jon.”
      “How’s it going, Jon?”
      “Really good. Thanks for bringing out the sun for us, Phil.”
      “Yeah, it’s a gorgeous day. Looks like you guys didn’t have to bring those
life jackets after all, eh?”
      “Oh well. They pack light.”
      “Cool. Well, if you guys are ready to go, I’ll lead the way.”
      Philip,ii with one l, had been patiently waiting for us alongside the
quiet road hugging Petpeswick Inlet.iii Armed with sturdy gumboots,
unflinching enthusiasm, and a well-equipped arsenal of stories, he began
blazing the jagged up-and-down terrain with ambitiously long strides.
The precarious trail crossed a neighbor’s property, curved around a small
cape, and—after a few tricky steps—broke up at a tiny beach of pebbles
and uneven rocks wetted on and off by breathless waves. There, Philip
began untying three kayaks while Jon and I debated how to pool the cam-
era gear.
      “So you guys have ocean-paddled before, right?” Philip sought to re-
assure himself.
      For leisure: yes. As far as work was concerned, this was a first. And it
couldn’t have waited much longer. Long days of driving through New
Brunswick’s foggy and snow-clogged backcountry roads, sojourns at
unimaginative hotel chains, and scarring frustrations with recording
technology had us clamoring for a relapse into raw adventure. There
was no need to hurry—as our visit had been carefully planned around
successive high tides—but it felt so good to be once again at eye level
with the Great Outdoors that I felt an irresistible child-like urge to
sprint to Phil’s house with a few long strokes. In just moments, I left
everyone in my wake. Being able to hear nothing but my panting breath
ii.
Brunswick_11.jpg
iii.
Brunswick_08.jpg
                            Breaking Waters                               161
and the gurgling vibration of my paddle on the ocean surface energized
me with serenity and clarity of mind. It was for moments like these that
I cherished fieldwork.
   Phil had been living on his small island since 1994. It was only a
few acres, but it made up in bucolic beauty what it lacked in size. Tall
coniferous trees, a gentle shoreline, pellucid waters, and soothing vistas
over the sun-bathed inlet would have made this an ideal development
site for insensitive tourist operators and commercial builders alike, had it
not been for him. The property—in the family’s hands since 1794—had
been bequeathed to Phil by his grandfather who, on his deathbed, asked
him to steward the place. Proud of his heritage and intimately close to
his grandpa, Phil made a solemn promise to carry out the onus, and over
the coming years he fiercely resisted insistent developers’ pressures to sell
out. Eventually, constantly rising property taxes made it obvious that if he
wanted to afford keeping the place he had to make it his residence, and so
he did. It took him and his three sons five and a half years and $50,000 to
erect the walls of his two-story, 1,200-square-foot, elemental-structured,
well-insulated home.
   “It’s a simple house anyone could build,” Phil observed with obvious sat-
isfaction in the efficiency and modesty of his abode. Modesty was under-
scored in everything he did and said. “I even had the chance of scoring a
great deal on helicoptering building material to the island,” he recounted,
“but that would have been an ugly show off. I am not a rich man. So my
sons and I just made trips back and forth on our little dinghy and carried
lumber up the trails.”
   Unlike the helicopter deal, the connection to the local electricity grid
would have been everything but a steal: $25,000 just for hooking up and
on top of that a monthly power bill and a yearly lease to run a cable across
the shore. His house instead now ran on a record-setting low 150-watt
solar system and on locally collected wood for heating. The system used to
be more powerful and reliant on wind energy too, but Hurricane Juan and
Tropical Storm Noel had recently wreaked havoc and Phil and others in the
area were still reeling from the devastating blows.
   At the age of 62, Phil, who hardly looked a day older than 50, received a
very small pension from his years of work in government energy conserva-
tion, which he supplemented with seasonal employment as a dockside fish-
ery observer and year-round writing for the local newspaper. He published
poetry books too, but—as poetry demands—chiefly as a labor of love. “I am
comfortable here, I have all I need,” Phil reflected at the dining table as he
took a puff from his pipe. Other than telecommunications and taxes, he had
no regular bills and, seemingly, even fewer worries.
162                          Breaking Waters
   I told Phil we were interested in ways of dealing with water during
our Nova Scotia trip: how water was sourced, channeled, stored, used,
and disposed of. I explained it was a very important issue for me, per-
sonally, as water conservation was one of the main reasons why I had
become interested in off-grid living in the first place. Though it rains
much on the West Coast during autumn and winter and my home’s well
is copiously replenished every year, long dry summers and heightened
seasonal demand require extremely careful water consumption from all
of us Gulf Islanders. So my well had taught me firsthand the practical
and conceptual lessons of monitoring, care, and involvement at the ser-
vice of conservation.
   The water system was the “least convenient” feature of his home, he
noted pensively. He used to have it “rigged up” with a pressurized system,
automatic filtration, and a small marine pump, but over the course of the
years mold had grown within the plastic pipes and he had to revert to a dif-
ferent solution. Rainwater was now harvested in 20-liter barrels placed on
his deck under the roof ’s eaves. Potable water, instead, came from a friend’s
well on the mainland. It required a bit of planning and hauling but it was
free, and it was something Phil could do when he went to town to take his
clothes to the laundromat.
   Due to the absence of a serviceable pump, the collected rainwater needed
to be brought inside in buckets and warmed up—when needed—on his
wood stove. The process got even more time-consuming in the winter when
snow had to be first melted.
   “All this bucket work reminds me of what my grandparents did,” he
smiled.
   “It’s a lot of work,” I remarked.
   “Yeah, but it’s exercise too, and I enjoy it,” Phil replied confidently. “I get
more exercise in a day than most people do in a week.”
Onerous Consumption
Phil had felt morally compelled to safeguard his island. His entire lifestyle
had been born out of that profound personal connection with his family and
his strong sense of responsibility for place stewardship. His day-to-day life
and all the choices he made to consume resources in the modest way he did
closely adhered to his ethics. Phil wasn’t the only off-gridder to feel and act
this way, of course. Across Canada we had met off-gridder after off-gridder
who related to their home and their land not as real estate, but rather for
their affective and moral significance.
                             Breaking Waters                                163
    “Ethical consumption”2 has been the subject of much growing inter-
est lately, especially in light of heightened public sensitivity to the moral,
socio-political, and environmental consequences of fair and unfair trade
and growing individual consumption.3 Ethical consumption practices are
“creative” and “reflexive” lifestyle positionings4 and relationship-building
consuming activities5 that go beyond merely rational and economic delib-
erations of price and use-value.6 As expressions of virtue, acts of ethi-
cal consumption allow individuals to establish meaningful relations with
others and to fashion a sense of self that is grounded in heartfelt moral
values.7
    In the off-grid lifeworld, ethical consumption in the form of resource
conservation and procurement stood in sharp contrast to a broader cul-
tural paradigm that links the pleasures of the good life with consumer-
ist ease, limited effort, and the widespread normalization of comfort and
convenience.8 In this sense, Phil’s water pails and buckets were more than
reminders of bygone generations. Not unlike solar panels, organic foods,
or compact fluorescent light bulbs,9 his water buckets made possible a
unique way of life and equally unique practices of sustainability and place
stewardship. The buckets that he and other off-gridders used functioned
as “moralizing machines”10 that “forge[d] specific socio-material rela-
tions”11 and shaped an ethical commitment to place and to people,12 ulti-
mately translating into a parsimonious orientation toward resource usage
and conservation.
    Moral commitment and physical effort, however, did not preclude full
enjoyment of life. Despite occasional minor hassles, the self-governance
of consumption practiced by off-gridders allowed for the “making of one’s
own life as a project of self-cultivation.”13 Through their re-inventions of
comfort and convenience, all off-gridders “exercise[d] freedom and respon-
sibility” and realized a “private right of individual autonomy”—however
partial.14 Such combination of individual choice and moral responsibil-
ity to other people and the environment was a unique way of practicing
hedonism.15 So, as paradoxical as this may sound, buckets served as crucial
tools for the ordinary gratifications of a modest but nonetheless fulfilling
“hedonist imaginary.”16
    Off-gridders’ everyday entanglements with water—that is, their direct,
practical, embodied engagement with the resources needed to drink, wash
dishes, do laundry, bathe, shower, and clean—constituted a type of onus: a
burden. But the burden was an enjoyable one: a treasured outcome of their
sense of responsibility and their relative enjoyment of self-sufficiency. Theirs
was, then, a form of onerous consumption: a type of ethical consumption char-
acterized by a willfully chosen burdensome involvement that—though it
164                        Breaking Waters
was a source of some degree of inconvenience, toil, and occasional techni-
cal problems—was uniformly appreciated as a fulfilling moral responsibility
and even a treasured privilege.
   Onerous consumption was a counter-hegemonic, self-reflective, and
critical orientation that rejected the seductive appeal of an unrestrained
consumerism promising a carefree, inconvenience-free, endless gratifica-
tion of needs and desires. The burdens of onerous consumption were moral
and practical obligations and orientations woven into ordinary routines
and accepted and even embraced as inevitable necessities of one’s existence.
Onerous consumption affirmed the value of a good life that wasn’t lived at
the expense of social and environmental justice.
   The word onerous denotes the condition of having an obligation or a
responsibility and is typically synonymous with burdensome, heavy, and
troublesome. Onerous consumption refers, therefore, to a type of con-
sumption characterized by a problematizing stance toward the act of con-
suming: a moral stance that recognizes the broader socio-environmental
consequences of consumption and that manifests itself through practices
of alternative engagement with place, natural resources, technology, and the
material world.
   Off-grid onerous consumption depended on direct, embodied, and per-
manent involvement in the process of collecting, storing, channeling, and
disposing of the subject matter of consumption. Onerous consumption was
engaged, committed, and entangled. It unfolded through practical ways of
incorporating an environment’s features into everyday life. Such incorpora-
tion required “attentive engagement” and a revealing “exploratory quest for
knowledge” through which off-gridders entered “actively into the constitu-
tion of their environments.”17
   Off-grid onerous consumption was marked by a deep involvement
in the process of procurement of whatever was consumed. To procure is
to exercise skill, attention, practical knowledge, sensitivity, and adapt-
ability in the process of obtaining resources, materials, and goods.18 To
procure is “to bring about, to obtain by care or effort, to prevail upon, to
induce.”19 When consumption entailed procurement, as it regularly did
for off-gridders, the ordinary mode of everyday life became task-like. In
this sense the objects of onerous consumption were anything but ready-
made or taken for granted. Off-grid onerous consumption was rather a
“taskscape” and “a project that had to be continually worked at.”20 The
consumption typical of an onerous mode therefore entailed a generative
capacity and a keen attunement to, and deep involvement in, a socio-
natural environment.
                            Breaking Waters                                165
Self-Sufficient Homes
Domestic consumption of water is constantly on the rise across the
world, causing increasing environmental concern.21 Countless policies,
technological innovations, commercial strategies, and research studies
are produced every year to deal with the problem of rapidly depleting
fresh water supplies as a result of escalating standards of domestic com-
fort, convenience, and cleanliness.22 Yet, for most of us, water remains
taken for granted and of limited preoccupation—save for the rare times
when scarcity surfaces as a result of droughts, power outages, or system
malfunctions.23 The sources of water, its distribution, and the infrastruc-
tures dedicated to its collection, treatment, and disposal remain largely
separate from our ordinary mode of engagement with our homes. But
what happens when water becomes the subject of ordinary consump-
tion? What happens when the collection, storage, channeling, and usage
of water shift from a distant assemblage operating in the background of
our consciousness to a proximate and immediate set of concerns? What
is everyday life like when people become entirely, or almost entirely,
water self-sufficient?
    We arrived at Andrea’s house on a misty morning, quite late for our
appointment. Betrayed by the dysfunctionality of the new digital maps
created for the iPhone, Jon and I had obliviously driven 30 kilometers
in the wrong direction. Fortunately, Andrea had been patient enough to
re-direct us over the phone. Apologetic and embarrassed, we sat down at
the kitchen table to drink a soothing cup of tea and fuel up on homemade
cookies, as her 14-year-old son calmly got ready to go to school. Being able
to spend quality time with him—she confided as he stepped out carrying
his backpack—was one of the key reasons why she had chosen this life-
style. “I practice homeopathy, I am a pet groomer, and I teach music,” she
said, but, “I carefully choose how much time I work and how I structure
my days.”
    Anxious about unkind bylaw enforcement, Andrea preferred we use a
fictitious name for her and that we maintain her area of residence entirely
confidential. We stored our cameras away and gladly obliged. Her distrust
of authority and large institutions was perfectly understandable, given what
she had experienced. It had all started a few years ago back in Ontario, when
she had received an erroneous $500 heating bill. Convinced of being right,
she had fought it tooth and nail, but the struggle had proven futile. When
utilities think they are right, right is what they are. Unwilling to surrender,
Andrea was eventually disconnected. But it wasn’t over. The utility pressed
166                        Breaking Waters
on and threatened legal action, so Andrea had to borrow money to pay off
her bill. When she was finally reconnected, the company admitted fault
and told her she had been right all along. Poetic justice had arrived too late,
though. Andrea had been “turned off by corporate utilities forever” and had
made a plan to move off-grid. Nova Scotia was home to some of the least
expensive land in the country—and, incidentally, some of the most beauti-
ful—and so here she was, seeking a taste of autonomy.
   Invariably, off-grid homes were, however, far from being fully autono-
mous self-governing spaces. Due to lack of clarity in municipal regulations
regarding whether she could build an off-grid residential dwelling on her
property, Andrea and her son had initially called home an old school bus
parked on their undeveloped lot just outside of town. A bus is, after all, a
mobile structure and not quite a permanent dwelling. In the meantime she
had been busy designing and building a barn and her current house: an ark-
shaped “houseboat” floating on stilts above a swampy area, and seemingly
floating above bylaws as well. “I love to work with wood,” she told us. “I’ve
designed and built my own houses before, it’s really simple and fulfilling.”
The ark only cost $6,000 and she managed to do all the work by herself with
the help of just two friends.
   Like all “boats,” Andrea’s ark had a rudimentary plumbing system and
used very little water. Water was mostly channeled through buckets. It was
either first pumped from a 14-foot deep hand-dug well, or harvested in
10-gallon plastic wheelbarrows and then wheeled around. Drinking water,
instead, came from the store. In town was also where Andrea did her laun-
dry. As in Phil’s case, a basic composting toilet eliminated the need for
flushing. As for cleaning and washing, the kitchen sink drained outside
into a holding tank, whereas a small 4-foot by 2-foot bathtub waited to be
hooked up to plumbing.
   “So, how do you bathe?” was my next, inopportune yet obligatory, question.
   “We have sponge baths. Sometimes we bathe at friends’ homes,” her
words quivered.
   I sensed this was a difficult topic. Though Andrea was proud of her
achievements, she was also profoundly aware of the constant challenges she
had to tackle on her own.
   “I used to bathe every night and had showers every morning before we
moved here,” she sighed, “long, luxurious, comforting baths. I miss that. I
have a real shower once a month now.”
   “It’s a compromise,” she reflected as she tried to contain her emotions. “I
see how much people consume in their homes, and how much they waste,
and I know that if we can live with less, we can be more sustainable and
independent.”
                            Breaking Waters                                167
   “Can you ever be truly sustainable and independent?”
   “Maybe I could, but I am aware of how much physical energy I have. I
can’t do everything on my own. What you see here is a compromise: a mix
of self-sufficiency and a pragmatic attitude.”
   To be fair, self-sufficiency was nothing but a myth. Like Andrea, all
off-gridders we met were well aware of the costs and challenges of prac-
ticing a completely self-sufficient lifestyle. Pragmatic compromises with
their ideals were therefore always necessary.24 Nevertheless, the ideal of
self-sufficiency—even if it was “just” an ideal—strongly inspired and
motivated off-gridders. Self-sufficiency promised them a sense of free-
dom and independence, and its daily practice yielded a re-affirming sense
of self-reliance, self-confidence, and self-efficacy. Many off-gridders like
Andrea, therefore, practiced as much self-sufficiency as they could, draw-
ing a line whenever hardline idealist orthodoxy got in the way of life’s
enjoyment.
   Lifestyles like Andrea’s were always informed by a prideful sense of
difference from the cultural norm, as well as by a self-affirming rejection
of the wasteful ways of life practiced by so many others.25 Frankly, they
often had a point too; most typical modern homes are anything but self-
sufficient. As urban studies scholar Maria Kaika has argued, in Western
societies the private space of the contemporary home is typically alienated
from nature. Homes are generally perceived as somehow independent and
autonomous from natural elements like water; elements that are viewed
as external, abstract, and “other.”26 There are exceptions to these trends, of
course, but still way too many citizens rely on water that is mass-produced,
standardized, and commodified by increasingly large corporate socio-tech-
nical networks.
   For off-gridders, instead, water had to be routinely domesticated through
painstaking efforts that “incorporated”27 it in meaningful ways. So, whereas
the sense of domestic comfort and convenience typical of on-grid homes
arises from a partial separation from, and exclusion of, the rather unpredict-
able nature outside,28 the sense of control typical of off-grid homes emerged
from a partial disconnection from a wasteful, inefficient, and corrupt society
seemingly incapable of establishing a more authentic rapport with the envi-
ronment. It was from this orientation, and from off-gridders’ disconnection
from large infrastructures, that a coherent sense of off-grid self-sufficiency
was born.
   Self-sufficiency was obviously always partial. Andrea, for example, bought
drinking water at the store and washed clothes at the laundromat. How-
ever, even a partial sense of separation from the ways of consumption of the
“outside world,” and even a limited self-exile from large infrastructures and
168                           Breaking Waters
utilities, were sufficiently powerful moves to justify a sense of autonomy and
independence. This sense of partial self-sufficiency allowed off-gridders to
feel that their use of resources occurred in greater synchrony with natural
availability, in righteous contrast to a broader social mode marked by a care-
less distancing29 of consumption from production and procurement. As a
result, complete self-sufficiency was not necessary to reap the self-affirming
moral rewards of onerous consumption. What did matter for off-gridders
was simply having undertaken the quest—the quest to internalize, rather
than externalize as most consumers do30—the costs and externalities of
domestic comfort, convenience, and cleanliness through personal responsi-
bility and hard work.
    I was wrong to think—as I had done for a moment back in Ontario—
that off-gridders’ quest for self-sufficiency was a form of selfish alienation.
Rather, their partial self-sufficiency was a relational responsibility:31 an
onus to duly play one’s part in socio-natural processes “wherein people and
their environments are continually bringing each other into being.”32 As
was typical of all forms of hedonism, concern with self-interest was evident
among off-gridders, but their pursuit of the good life was always accompa-
nied by a preoccupation with the greater environmental, social, and politico-
economic externalities of individual action. In this way, off-grid hedonism
always required involvement, ethical commitment, a sense of onus, and
the carrying out of multiple tasks that demanded financial expenditures,
continuous learning, and application of skill. So, rather than an ascetic
bright-eyed idealism, it was a pragmatic hedonism that fueled the off-grid
quest for self-sufficiency. But this was no hardened, irresponsible, decadent
realism. Rather, it was an interesting form of hedonism that we might call
“alternative.”
Alternative Hedonism
Hedonists like to enjoy life. Alternative hedonists are equally keen on pur-
suing pleasures but enjoy doing it in socially and environmentally conscious
ways.33 According to British social theorist Kate Soper,34 alternative hedo-
nism “is premised on the idea that even if consumerism were indefinitely
sustainable it would not enhance human happiness and well-being.” In
fact, consumerism and the unrestrained hedonism it stands for are not only
politically, economically, socially, environmentally, and culturally irrespon-
sible, but also ultimately unsatisfying at a personal level. So we need an
alternative, in Soper’s view, an alternative that promises a positive vision of
the good life as well as a sustainable future for all. That is the philosophy
                             Breaking Waters                               169
of alternative hedonism. This type of hedonism is an alternative to con-
sumerism, but also to the ascetic sanctimoniousness and gloomy defeat-
ism present in some currents of the environmental movement. Alternative
hedonism “points to new forms of desire, rather than fears of ecological
disaster, as the most likely motivating force in any shift towards a more
sustainable economic order.”35
    As a form of alternative hedonism, onerous consumption was a quest for
the good life, a quest that was both negative and affirmative. It negated the
unchecked behavior typical of consumer culture and criticized the pursuit
of an “unpleasurable and self-denying”36 standard of living that forced a
person to work more in order to spend more. At the same time, oner-
ous consumption affirmed the values of comfort, cleanliness, and conve-
nience and the gratification drawn from the basic pleasures of domestic
life. Though it may seem incoherent to suggest that the cultivation of a
burden was a hedonistic practice, off-gridders’ experiences showed that the
onuses inherent in relatively self-sufficient living were personally fulfilling.
Involvement was onerous, yes, but not unpleasant because it generated a
sense of self-reliance, self-efficacy, independence, and a feeling of pride in
one’s ethical commitments.
    “It’s all about consumption,” Simon opined. “It’s not hard to reduce what
you consume, but there has to be a certain amount of self-control and self-
discipline involved.”
    “You have to want this way of living, you have to want it enough because
there is no ‘push-button instant technology’,” Simon’s wife, Sue, added, “you
have to work with nature.”
    We had heard these things, of course, but somehow they sounded differ-
ent coming from Simon and Sue. Here and there throughout the country
we had occasionally suspected that some off-gridders made virtue out of
necessity—painting a somewhat rosier portrait of domestic life than the
average middle-class citizen might have under the same circumstances—
because of limited financial options or reduced opportunities. Not that
making virtue out of necessity would have lessened the significance of their
lifestyle, or the validity of our arguments, but there was sometimes a feel-
ing that it would have been difficult to “sell” this way of life—outhouses,
lack of plumbing, hand-operated blenders, and all—to a lot of people in
our modern society. But in a way, it was houses like Simon and Sue’s that
strengthened the wider case for off-grid living as a hedonist and widely
enviable lifestyle pursuit.
    Not that there was anything decadent about their 840-watt photovol-
taic and 1-kilowatt wind-powered, 1,500-square-foot, ocean-facing villa,
but it was the type of home that could have easily graced the pages of a
170                             Breaking Waters
home-and-garden magazine. And yet, its operation was everything but
hands-free.
      “You have to think about what you do,” Simon and Sue—two c­ ommitted
environmentalists with a long history in off-grid living across the
globe—acknowledged.
      Take their water usage, for example. Hidden under the kitchen rug, like a
giant elephant in the room, there was a 12 × 8 × 4-foot polyurethane water
cistern. Its name was Theodor, they joked, because when it arrived on the
delivery truck it looked just like TV’s Theodor the Tugboat. Theodor—we
learned as we lifted the rug, unscrewed its top lid, and inspected its gaping
mouth-like opening—stored up to 9,000 liters of the rainwater collected
from the roof and channeled in through a pipe.
      “It’s deep,” Sue described, “we take the stepladder and go down there
when we have to clean it out.”
      “So it’s not an out-of-sight, out-of-mind thing?” I asked.
      “Not at all. We monitor how much water we have,” Sue explained as she
showed the “high-tech” gadget used to inspect storage: a wooden dipstick
adorned by a variety of marks and reference points. The quarter-full mark
was the cut-off point, she illustrated, because the last 10 inches of water sat
below the reach of their 24-volt DC water pump.
      To conserve water they used a humanure toilet beside their other con-
ventional low-flush toilet, a low-flow shower, and a very efficient washing
machine. As well, they recycled wastewater to the garden plants. And their
tightly insulated passive solar house consumed no more than 3 cords of
wood per year, thanks in part to a relatively unique way of using water. On
the house roof there were two solar hot water collector systems that warmed
up water and also heated up a glycol-water mix, then channeled it all under-
neath their main floor to radiate heat to the house. And because it could
takeiv a while for warm water to come out of the showerheads, they kept a
bucket in the shower booth and collected 8 liters of cold water while they
waited for the warm stuff to arrive.
      “People want their housing to be easy,” Sue remarked as she showed
us the bathroom, “but the key is to be observant and mindful” if you want
to conserve. To be mindful, observant, and involved sounds like a burden
to most of us, as accustomed as we are to flicking on a switch and letting
distant network infrastructures take care of us. But the “burden,” to off-
gridders like Simon and Sue, was a pleasant one: something they embraced
and enjoyed as much as they endured as a basic necessity and responsibility
of life.
iv.
                                Breaking Waters                                171
     In combination with large-scale socio-technical networks of water
distribution, indoor plumbing has made it easier for constantly escalat-
ing standards of cleanliness, hygiene, convenience, and comfort to become
normalized and taken for granted.37 Consequently, the responsibility
for managing water supplies and waste has been increasingly delegated
to infrastructures and agencies—“Big Water/Big Shit systems”38—far
removed from consumers’ homes. The constantly growing consumption
of water, combined with the existence of assemblages that allow individual
consumers to feel separated at best and irresponsible at worst from the
consequences of their everyday routines, does not bode well for the sustain-
ability of our collective way of life.
     In contrast, awareness of one’s own consumption and of resources’ inevi-
table scarcity is a crucial element of conservation practices.39 As a result,
many policies and programs aimed at developing environmentally sustain-
able practices emphasize the need for individuals to make their consump-
tion habits visible and subject to personal scrutiny.40 By becoming conscious
of otherwise taken-for-granted practices and their consequences, consumers
of energy, fuels, and water can experience “revelatory moment[s]” with the
power of shedding light on, and hopefully altering, the wastefulness of their
behaviors.41
     In a way, off-grid living was precisely that: a protracted exercise in cul-
tivating awareness of one’s consumption and in constantly developing a
deeper understanding of what it meant to utilize natural resources. In fact,
off-gridders reversed the prototypical orientation toward a house as some-
thing separate from an untamed “nature” outside its walls by taking an active
role in collecting, storingv, utilizing, and disposing of natural resources and
by becoming physically involved in how resources like water were channeled
in and out of their homes. By doing so, off-gridders turned potentially un-
reflexive, habitual, and mindless routine activities into going concerns. Off-
grid living, in short, consisted of making inconspicuous everyday domestic
practices fully conspicuous and thus the starting point of self-affirming
conservation.
                                          ***
A month before, back at home, I had insisted on searching for ­off-gridders
on Nova Scotia’s Cape Breton Island. For years I had fantasized Cape
Breton as a windswept luxuriant land sheathed in gelid Atlantic currents
v.
Brunswick_09.jpg
172                              Breaking Waters
and echoing melodies of time-forgotten Gaelic and Acadian traditions,
and I felt a deep urge to go there. When Air Canada’s small DeHavilland
dropped us off in Sydney—Cape Breton’s capital—I realized my romantic
imagination hadn’t been too naive. On the Cabot Trail abrupt cliffs and dark
woodsvi dove down the ice-grey waters underneath them. Dormant fishing
villages punctuated the meandering road, resounding with signs of bygone
folklore. Swiftly drifting billows chasing each other in the sky alternately
obscured and then lit up snow-covered peaks and narrow valleys, intermit-
tently hiding and highlighting the route ahead of us. Closer to Sydney, we
then spotted a far less hallowed sight—and yet a profoundly reverent one to
us—the road sign indicating the ferry route to the island, at last nearby, of
Newfoundland. Few roadside treasures could have brought greater satisfac-
tion to two weary travellers in search of their final destination.
     It wasn’t all bliss and rugged beauty, of course. Many barren homes and
padlocked doors silently recounted stories of exile and heart-breaking out-
migration—for after all there were as many Cape Bretoners to be seen on
their haunting homeland streets as one could find any day or night melan-
cholically shoveling tar out of Northern Alberta’s unforgiving oily earth.
And yet, other people were moving the opposite way: relocating to seduc-
tive Cape Breton from distant lands. Among them were Brian and Gina,
who had moved from the US Midwest to Canada 12 years ago—Americans
were by far Canadian off-gridders’ largest ethnic minority group—to seek
a simpler, better way of life. After they had completed building their straw
bale home, both in their 30s, Brian had become a renewable energy special-
ist and Gina a potter.
     Their abode, while humble in ambition, was a challenge to the descrip-
tive word. Almost Steampunk-like in atmosphere and wildly creative in
its most minute detail, its main feature was a massive jagged boulder that
served as the home’s astonishing hearth. The rest of the house, it felt, had
seamlessly clung and grown around it.
     “You want us to show you how we get water?” Gina asked, as our first
mugs of hot coffee ran dry.
     We began by walking outside to the water operations’ headquarters: the
tower and pump. Upstairs, the 20-foot tall, wooden water tower hosted a
250-gallon cistern that during the warm months collected rainwater har-
vested from the roof. Gravity fed water down from the second floor of the
tower—where the cistern was placed—to a hose used to fill buckets. The
buckets were then carried wherever needed: inside the house for washing
vi.
Brunswick_01.jpg
                                Breaking Waters                              173
dishes, to the bathhouse for body washing, or to the garden for nourish-
ing plants and animals. I walked the 15 steps up the steep ladder to take
a quick glance from up high: an idyllic 23-acre property sitting near the
top of a gently rising shore overlooking the mainland. “What you see out
there is what some old islanders still insist on calling Nova Scotia,” Brian
commented with a smile. “You might want to make Cape Breton a separate
chapter in your book.”
      Back downstairs, Gina proceeded to demonstrate how the pump worked
by grabbing a “foot valve”—a 3-foot-long cylindrical metal container about
5 inches wide in diameter—and lowering it through a manual pulley. By
handling the rope Gina dropped the foot valve into a narrow opening in
the ground marked by a metal canister. Four seconds later the container hit
the 15-foot waterline of their 204-foot-deep drilled well. A few bubbling
sounds bounced against the metal and reverberated through the opening.
It was a signal the bucket was full, so Gina hoisted it up and released the
water into a pail.
      Bucket in hand we walked a few feet to the bathhouse/sauna: a 15-by-
15 foot wooden building heated by a small woodstove. On shower days
Brian and Gina placed a bucket on top of the woodstove and warmed it
up to the desired temperature. They then took the bucket and dumped
the warm water into a portable, eBay-bought, US Army-issued, field
shower bag. The 5-gallon bag was then hung high above their heads to
trickle down water.
      “We usually shower every other day,” Gina said, anticipating my next
nosey question, “and we make sure to use non-toxic soaps” so that the gray
water, drained right outside, would not pollute the soil.
      “It’s our own waste,” Brian said, “and I feel we have the responsibility to
deal with our own waste.”
      “We don’t use much water,” Gina continued, “but it’s not because we
don’t have enough. We just don’t need much.”
      “And it takes work too,” Brian added, “it takes some planning and a little
bit of time, especially when we have to filter it to drink it.”
      In most of our homes water flows out of the tap almost magically,
demanding little aside from a timely bill payment. But things were dif-
ferent in off-grid homes. Being independent from municipal water mains
meant having the responsibility to harvest rainwater or extract groundwa-
ter, which required relying on muscle power or on electrical pumps and a
plumbing system capable of meeting demand. And it also meant finding
ways to dispose of gray water and human bodily waste. The majority of
vii.
174                          Breaking Waters
off-grid homes had plumbing, but even many of those relied on an out-
house and other unconventional solutions that most people might find
somewhat inconvenient. The onus was not a light one; Brian and Gina,
and many other off-gridders, had to solve many demanding and potentially
overbearing technical challenges. Yet, their responsibilities brought them
not a sense of discomfort and inconvenience, but instead a deep apprecia-
tion for the basic pleasures of their home life.
   Our last stop on the tour of their “compound” was the outhouse. Approx-
imately 8-by-8 feet in size, covered by a steeply pitched, low-hanging roof,
the outhouse was suitably far from both their home and their well. The
placement was ideal for hygiene but it was no less than a whole minute’s
walk from their front door. It required involvement but it was clean and
worked simply—Brian explainedvii as he pointed at the square wooden con-
tainer mounted underneath the toilet seat.
   I strove to imagine what that might be like during a blustery winter
night: “Is it a hassle to come all the way here to do your business?”
   “Nah! There are many worse things in the world,” Gina replied.
   “What’s the problem, really? I pee anywhere. I walk outside and pee,” Brian
laughed, “humans have been peeing outside since . . . since the beginning!”
   Bathrooms are the primary sites of domestic water consumption. A typi-
cal power shower can utilize 20 to 50 liters of water per minute, whereas a
common toilet can use up to 15 liters per flush. In Canadian homes, baths
and showers account for 37%, and toilets for 30%, of water usage.42 Though
the tradition of the weekly bath is not so historically distant, showering is
now perceived by most people as a normal daily routine.43 Daily showering
epitomizes the rapid escalation of contemporary standards of cleanliness.44
As body washing has transitioned from a public activity to a private one, and
later on from a hygiene-informed practice to one focused on the cultivation
of well-being,45 daily shower routines have come to symbolize the perva-
siveness of socio-technical networks of water distribution and consumers’
dependence on their reliable operation.
   Like other household objects, water has a physical life: it is intro-
duced into the home, used, and disposed of using specific conduits46
over which most of us have little or no control.47 But while it is true that
divestment and disposal are not totally un-reflexive activities,48 for most
people the flushing of the toilet generally takes place with little regard
to its consequences. In part this is because of the generalized attitude
toward human waste as pollutant dirt transgressing the social order.49
But in part this is also because flushing waste out to sewers pushes urine
and feces away, beyond the boundaries of the home, toward an unknown
elsewhere undeserving of concern.50 The off-grid consumer of water
                              Breaking Waters                                     175
couldn’t afford to be so cavalier, as discarded matter always acted back
in direct, visible ways.51
   By becoming responsible for the “sinks”52 where their gray-water and
solid waste were disposed of, Brian and Gina did not so much “use” water,
as “brought it into use” by incorporating it into a system of deeply inter-
related activities.53 As a result of their involvement in water procurement
and disposal, off-gridders’ domestic work truly became “integral”54 to the
whole process of consumption. Thus Brian and Gina reframed their rela-
tion to local water resources and enacted counter-normative relations with
place, resources, conduits, and their meanings.55 By doing so, dirt became
not something out of place, but rather matter in and of place56 that was
subject to the their direct “accountability.”57
   Onerous consumption hinged on a principle of sentient ecology—the
idea that living beings gather reflexive knowledge about their environments
through orientations and sensitivities continually honed in the practical
experiences of living life.58 As such, the concept of onerous consumption
highlighted how the inconspicuous consumption of natural resources could
be made conspicuous, meaningful, place-sensitive, and therefore immedi-
ately consequential.59
   The escalating global quest for domestic comfort, cleanliness, and conve-
nience flies in the face of environmental conservation.60 However, we real-
ized as we left Nova Scotia, the pursuit of a good life does not have to result
in environmental damage. As onerous consumers in the tenth province had
showed us, and as Soper had opined: “We need a new political imaginary
that dwells explicitly on the satisfactions to be had from consuming differ-
ently. [. . .] We need visions of a future consumption built around environ-
mentally less damaging methods of farming and commodity production,
the use of renewable energy resources, the pleasures of unpolluted air and
water, the recycling of all waste, the shortening of the working week, the
decline of shopping.”61 A new possible imaginary to practicing conservation
could entail not the sacrificing of good living but rather the sensitizing of
our attention to what an environment makes available and the need to work
with it—and not in spite of it. All this won’t necessarily be easy, but whoever
said living and housing are always meant to be?


11 Camping, Out on the Land

It never fails. You’re out camping and right in the middle of the night you
feel an irresistible urge to go pee. The outhouse is only a few steps away, but
you dread losing sleep momentum by getting out of bed and scavenging for
your shoes and lamp. You ignore it for a while. Yet, it keeps you awake. The
pressure is too strong. It’s nippy outside, and getting dressed is a hassle. You
eventually surrender.
      It’s –30°C (–22°F) on the Arctic tundra. You have been cautioned to be
on the lookout for polar bears, especially at night. So you try and speed up
urination flow—however a futile physiological effort that may be. As you go
on about your business, you anxiously scan the immense horizon glistening
in the precocious pre-morning dawn.
      And then it happens, just like you feared it would. The light cast by your
headlamp hits two beady, fluorescent eyes gazing hungrily at you from some
50 meters away. Standing still, shaking, you stare. The beady eyes stare back,
equally motionless. Your entire life flashes before your sleepy eyes. Then it
jumps. Then you jump. Do you run now?
                                              ***
Iqalugaaqjuitii—a “place of many little fish,” in the Inuktitut language—is
one of a handful of outpost camps scattered around the southern shore of
Baffin Island, in Canada’s Nunavut territory. Most of these camps were built
ii.
                                              179
180                     Camping, Out on the Land
in the mid-1980s, when the Canadian government thought it behooved
them to encourage—after decades of systematic eradication of traditional
nomadic lifestyles—hunting and fishing and the intergenerational transfer
of language and skills that goes along with them.
   Our illugalaq was a newer edifice. Built 17 years ago by Timmun and
Kristiina, just like all the other neighboring cabins, it hosted its owners,
family, friends, and occasional guests for short weekend or weeklong camp-
ing getaways. Escape, not subsistence, was the purpose of those getaways.
“It’s for our mental health,” in Kristiina’s words, “we come here to get away.”
   They weren’t the only ones to go camping for that reason. Camps are
unique spaces, and camping trips unique times. They are ephemeral pauses in
the rhythms of everyday life. They are changes of pace and place, which allow
us to experience time as duration and flow.1 Yet, as fleeting as they are, camps
endure year after year, becoming points of return, familiar escapes, comfort-
able safe havens, existing “between the temporary and the permanent.”2
   Camping is also the most common way in which at one point or another
in their lives people experience a taste of off-grid living. We may have never
thought of it that way, but camping—one of the most common forms of
outdoor leisure in Canada and the US, and a “widely ramified institution
linked to national character”3 in our continent—gives us a small but often
enjoyable sense of the real off-grid life. After all, when we camp we are
generally disconnected from electricity and natural gas networks and we
are responsible for making light and heat, generally accomplishing both
through a simple, cozy campfire. Camping also entails collecting water by
hand, cooking our food differently, and enjoying the comforts of sleeping
away from the light of the urban night.
   Camping may also mean having to walk a quarter of a mile to find an
outhouse, showering with lukewarm water, fighting with ants and mosqui-
tos, and constantly having to tinker with a campsite: chopping wood, fixing
tarps, washing dishes by hand, and drying irreparably wet firewood. The
pleasures of the camp life as well as its obvious discomforts and inconve-
niences are what make it such a good exercise in off-grid living.
   Leisure camping comes in many shapes and forms. There is tent camping,
of course, in both organized and wilderness campgrounds. But there are many
other forms too: there are jamboree camps, peace camps, children’s summer
camps, field camps, base camps, festival camps, re-enactment camps, backyard
camps, RV/caravan camps, and many more.4 Then there are the more perma-
nent camps where families may return year after year: the lakeside houses, the
cabins in the woods, the upstate cottages, and all those countryside “camp-
steads”5 that aren’t quite a home, and yet more than just a tent. What we actu-
ally do at all these sites may differ from person to person, from place to place,
from year to year, but a few important things do remain common.
                             Camping, Out on the Land                              181
      We live in homes, towns, and cities over which most of us have limited or no
control. Though our grandparents or great-grandparents may have been deeply
involved in collecting water, tending to the hearth, growing food, or making
do with what was at hand, nowadays our homes provide us with everything
we want without much involvement on our part. We have limited control over
the places and the resources that make our homes what they are. And camping
unsettles that relation. By taking charge of a small site and reinventing how we
bring comfort to our shelter, even if only for a few days, we play and experiment
with a different sense of daily order, temporarily re-imagining our lives.
      Camping is an event with a recurring structure: “we leave home, we arrive
at a site, we clear [or clean] an area, we make and then finally break camp
before departing.”6 Camping—no matter what precise form it takes—is then
a dual process of deterritorialization and reterritorialization.7 Deterritorializa-
tion is a process of taking control and order away from a place, from a territory.
This is generally followed by reterritorialization: a process whereby weakened
ties between people, culture, and place are re-organized, re-assembled, and
subject once again to new forms of control and order.8 Camping is therefore
generative of space—camping indeed, like off-grid living, makes place.9
      And like all good things camping must end. The essence of camping
resides in its very temporary and transitory nature, “to put down any sort
of camp in a place is to hammer out a truce between passage and perma-
nence.”10 Camping is fun because it ends. Camping is meaningful because
it eventually stops being meaningful. The reterritorialization it plays out
simply must give way, once again, to powerful deterritorializing forces.
                                              ***
We left Cape Dorset right before lunchtime on a cold but sunny April day.
For four hours we rode our snowmobilesiii over lakes, ponds, rivers, creeks,
and the ocean. At times we steered away from frozen waters and conquered
overland trails, often none the wiser of the topographical substitutions. We
arrived at Iqalugaaqjuit in the late afternoon.
      We had departed British Columbia with borrowed parkas and untested
gloves two days before. Because of the unwise gear choice the first few min-
utes of Skidoo driving had turned out to be atrocious. My right hand had
more or less frozen stuck on the accelerator handle, gripping it steady at
such an angle that it worked like a human-mediated cruise control, set at
precisely 21 mph. Thankfully, at the first cigarette break, local knowledge
had saved me. A pair of spare beaver fur mitts had been kindly provided by
Kristiina, who introduced me to their superiority over my cheap polyester
iii.
182                          Camping, Out on the Land
gloves while Timmun un-dramatically switched on the heat on my snow-
mobile handlebar—a mix of old and new world solutions.
      Snowmobiling is an acquired taste, much like getting lashed in the but-
tocks with a leather whip: once you see past the sore lower back and the
bruises you actually realize that it’s just another way of getting around and
that in fact, for some people, it’s the normal way of doing it. Given its wide-
spread and enthusiastic uptake, it makes you wonder how rougher dogsled
transport must have been, back in the day.
      Other than a few stretches of pavement within the boundaries of tiny
hamlets, there are no roads in Canada’s Eastern Arctic. Snow and ice make
snowmobile travel possible during the colder months: from November to
May. Boats are used to navigate the ocean separating Nunavut’s communi-
ties from one another and from outpost camps during July, August, and
September. During the shoulder seasons, when ice is breaking or freezing
up, only airplanes dares to go out on the land.
      “Going out on the land,” the locals’ favorite expression to indicate going
camping, is a bit of a misnomer. The “land” is actually snow. Some of it is
frozen solid, some fluffier but dry, some slushy, some icy and translucent,
some resplendently turquoise even under the most timid of suns. The actual
“land” is a different entity altogether, and an evanescent one for most of the
year. I imagined it—for that was all I could do—as myriad soggy colorful
meadows and shallow mosquito-stocked lakes, but I only actually witnessed
it as lifeless and cold granite dotsiv littering the unimaginatively bitonous—
tritonous at best on a sunny day—icescape.
      On land—or water, who knows?—our speedometer snuck past the 30 mph
tack once or twice, but it was a short-lived thrill. Though wintery Arctic ice­
scapes are generally easily amenable to speeding, tidal forces dancing underneath
the ocean constantly pushed and pulled trails up and down, creating ridges and
walls requiring twists and turns not unlike Formula 1 chicanes. Among them,
most spectacular though immensely vexing, were 2-ton popsicles known as pres-
sure ice. Near shores—where these small communities of Lilliputian locked-in
icebergs appeared, grew, shrunk, and then almost vanished twice daily with the
ebbing and flowing of tides—snowmobile travel was rendered labyrinthine,
requiring low speed, patience, and a peripheral attention to distances that was
parallel in nature to the task of merging onto a gridlocked parkway.
      All of this slipping and sliding around was a fun adventure, and it had a
point too. Jon and I had been pursuing the opportunity to go camping in
the Arctic since we had discovered its popularity on our earlier trip to the
Mackenzie Delta, in the Northwest Territories. For the thermally unadven-
turous, Arctic camping seems like an unconscionable thing to do, but for
iv.
                            Camping, Out on the Land                             183
residents of Northern Canada it was the typically preferred way to escape
the hustle and bustle of increasingly busy and conspicuously loud communi-
ties (snowmobile engines aren’t as quiet as you might think).
     Camping in the Arctic was a bit different in context, but not terribly dis-
similar in actual practice, from “regular” camping down south. And interest-
ingly enough, even up here it was a way of escaping the rat race. Take Iqaluit,
for example, the territory’s capital city. Pizza Hut, KFC, and not one but three
coffee-and-donut shops of the quintessentially Canadian Tim Horton’s fran-
chise chain competed for attention with shawarma eateries, hotels, govern-
ment offices, schools, health centers, restaurants, flower shops, and crowded
four-way intersections begging for the arrival of the Eastern Arctic’s first stop
light. No wonder then that local women and men—like our friend Niviaqsi
put it—really “needed a break” from all this every now and then.
     Camping up here had a deep historical significance too. Throughout
most of the twentieth century the Canadian government gradually took
control of the land away from Inuit people, destabilizing their traditional
semi-nomadic ways of life, and forcing upon them a sedentary existence
dependent on government assistance.11 Going out on the land was a way of
regaining that control, a way of reterritorializing traditional culture by prac-
ticing once again old skills and re-building ties with place. Like all forms of
camping, going out on the land worked “between mobility and fixity, locality
and foreignness, temporality and permanence.”12
Frozen Fishing
After unloading the two enormous trailer-sheds of all the camping gear—
no station wagon or SUV trunk can really compete with the cargo space
of a qamutiik—we hurried to the lake to lay down our fishing netv before
nightfall. Though Timmun is said to have pulled it off by himself in his
younger years, ice fishing with a net was no one-inuk job.
     You start by excavating a hole, approximately 2 meters wide, in the snow.
With as many as 2 or 3 feet of snow cleared off the icy lake surface, you
begin drilling two holes immediately next to one another. You then merge
the two together with a 6-foot ice chisel. Next, you shove an ice crawler into
the hole and send it floating under the ice. This is the tricky part; you must
listen for the crawler’s metal hook rubbing against the ice from underneath
and determine, from the snow-muffled sound transmitted above, where it
lies. That is the precise spot where you want to dig and drill two more holes
through the ice. If you guessed right the crawler should be there, so you fish
it out and grab on to the rope that it carried from the first hole. That is the
v.
184                          Camping, Out on the Land
rope to which the fishing net will be tied, after being stretchedvi from the
first to the second hole and secured in both places with a simple knot around
a shovel or an ice chisel. That’s it. Overnight the char will magically fill the
net to reward you for your good effort.
      Kristiina and Timmun’s cabinvii was unpretentious and small—at 16 ×
12 feet it was just big enough to accommodate cooking space, a bunk bed,
and a foldout couch tucked behind the dining table. Heat was provided
by a combination of a propane-fueled camping stove and an electric space
heater powered by a generator. The temperature inside could get as high as
21°C (70°F). The contrast with the outside required ventilation by way of
two air exchangers: simple plastic-covered openings through the wall that
almost managed to stop the unrelenting condensation. All of this made for
a visually arresting explosion of steam every time the door was opened, so
that stepping outside not only felt, but also spectacularly looked, just as if
you walked into a meat locker.
      Kristiina was a gold mine of information. Listening to her camping stories
made every evening fly fast, and games of Scrabble helped when the stories ran
out. Camping out on the land seemed like a mix of relaxation and busyness, but
even the busyness—directed at securing basic comforts and sheer survival—
was playful enough to be a diversion from the daily rituals of life in town.
      When you camp in a remote place you carry on as if you were playing
house. Playing is marked by few rules. You must imagine the camp to be
the human race’s last self-reliant outpost; and you must endeavor to make
your temporary dwelling as comfortable as a permanent one, but different
enough from a normal home to be challenging and exciting. Good camp-
ers play the game ostentatiously, as if their reterritorialzing skill display was
subject to the scrutiny of scrupulous judges. Those new to camping, or those
like Jon and me who had played the game on far away territory, mostly just
listen, learn, and try not to get in the way.
      Uninterruptedly Timmun and Niviaqsi, like two grown children seemingly
incapable of sitting down, would spin their wheels outside the cabin as if keen
on corroborating our game metaphor. The small cabin’s atmosphere made this
possible. Cabins are hardly ever built for comfort; they are “built to motivate
people to get out of doors.”13 And so our cabin did, every time bursting out in
frozen vapors to dramatically underline every ingress and exit.
      The first clear night gave way to a scrimmage of early morning clouds,
which then quickly dissipated as the winds rose. Temperatures hovered in
the -20s with the wind chill. After a hearty breakfast of bannock and rasp-
berry jam, it was time to check the net. It was a simple enough job that even
vi.
vii.
                             Camping, Out on the Land                               185
two clumsy southerners like us were allowed to help. It was fun too. After
ensuring that the first hole was free of any cutting edge we pulled the net
out of the ice in its entirety while Timmun, in dramatic suspense, recorded
the outcome with his iPad for later posting onto Facebook.
       The fish were still alive but visibly fatigued from a long night of wran-
gling with the nylon net, then shocked by the sudden exposure to the cold
air. Quickly, un violently, they passed.viii We untangled 16 the first morning,
and then moreix at sundown and in the following days, until we reached the
contented conclusion that five dozen took enough space on our qamutiik.
       Arctic char tasted like a genial pastiche of Pacific salmon’s delicately sweet
flesh and lake trout’s juicy and tender meat. It was at its best eaten raw, chun-
ked into steaks cut sideways or into long fillets cut lengthwise and salted
overnight. Kristiina taught us to make the rubbery skin optional, carve each
bite sashimi-style, and then dip the pieces into lemon pepper or soy sauce.
At the messy tablex we all agreed that one of the best things about camping
was eating good food.
       Though no more than 200 meters away there was a small cluster of cabins,
six in total, no illugalaq other than ours received visitors during the time we
were there. Alleviated of the responsibility to exchange a salvo of small talk with
neighbors, hunt for a wireless signal, or catch the six o’clock news, Iqalugaaqjuit
felt—and the more so as time went on—like a lunar substation where life could
stand still and silent. And perhaps such was one of the greatest appeals of camp-
ing: the incontrovertible sensation that you were here, and nowhere else. The
mobility and vagrancy enabled by growingly omnipresent media of communi-
cation ends abruptly at camp. It’s temporary, to be sure, but the unplugging of
that TV, computer, and mobile phone root us deeply—even if only for a short
span of time—in a distinct place. The reterritorialization of camping locates us,
gives us a place to call our own, and gives a sense of the here and the now.
       And here you could unmistakably perceive that the Arctic tundra had a
strange way of acting. Its few visible traces—the odd raven, bear, wolf, white
Ptarmigan,xi or fox—would go about the land reservedly, looking disconcert-
edly surprised every time you spotted them. But the Arctic tundra was not as
inhospitable as it’s reputed to be. Far from being a bleak, desolate, or barren
wasteland, it was more like a very large pond in which it was remarkably easy
to be a big fish. It was as if the tundra wished to cast a spotlight on every
little animal, plant, and human life that managed to find its way there. As if it
wanted to say, “here you are the main feature, this is your chance to be a star.”
viii.
ix.
x.
xi.
186                    Camping, Out on the Land
   One afternoon, as we shadowed Timmun’s skidoo-powered zigzags in a
fruitless search for caribou tracks, I came to the realization that I had been
wrong all along about the “land.” The granite rocks that I proclaimed guilty of
rendering the icescape featureless with their redundant shapes and unimagi-
native traits turned out to be much richer upon close inspection. As Timmun
exploited their patterns in the course of wayfinding through the island’s interior,
I began to appreciate the rocks’ diverse characteristics: the charcoal ones, dark-
ened by a fungus named tripe; the verdant ones, vegetated by a lichen capable
of keeping caribou alive in the winter; and the reddish-beige ones, shrouded
in a blood-like splattering of a microscopic plant whose identity I questioned
ignorantly. And more than just eye candy for my color-starved sight, the rocks
also held enough solar warmth to serve as temporary stools in an otherwise
seat-deprived place. Once, upon sitting down, I nodded dreamingly to the
rocks as if to apologize to them—they too played their part eloquently here. I
too was beginning to find that our camp was more than a site. It was a place.
   Though we caught no caribou we netted plenty of fish. Eight- and ten-
pound char came to the surface not only by way of the holes dug for our nets
but also via smaller bores pierced for the leisurely pursuit of jigging. “Some
people can jig from morning to night when they go camping,” Kristiina
pointed out after I admitted defeat, puzzled at the whole bloody thing.
   The fun, I was told, was in seeing the fish. To make eye contact with the
scaly beasts you had to be comfortable enough with shoving your head down
the ice hole in order to shield away the glare from the milky sky. Neither Jon
nor I were able to lie down for too long on the snow, stomach first, and seduce
the poor things with morsels of orange peel and then clobber them in the head.
Overcome by claustrophobia and by empathy for the vitamin C-starved verte-
brates, while the rest of the gang jigged away I spent my time wandering about
the place, fascinated by the supine dedication of my fellow campers as much as
by the arrival onstage of an unexpected star above: an overhead jet.
   The Arctic is a busy place these days. Many of us have indeed travelled
above it, at 36,000 feet of altitude, en route to Europe or North America. I
spotted my first plane the second afternoon at the lake. “Taken aback” does
a half-decent job at capturing my bewildered feeling. Curiously, as the plane
zoomed by, I began wondering whether anyone from the cabin of the wide-
bodied jet could see me. I knew they couldn’t, but I badly wanted them to
notice me, to wonder what I was doing, whether I was lost.
   Then something eerie happened: I saw myself.
   From down there I spotted myself on that very plane: pausing the movie
playing on my personal monitor to lift the curtain to see where I was. And
from up there I laid eyes on myself, staring back from all the way below.
   “What are you doing?” I asked.
   “Why did you step out of the plane, don’t you know you’re not supposed to?”
   “Why are you there, instead of home with your family?”
                         Camping, Out on the Land                          187
    “What are you trying to prove?”
    “Are you trying to show off ?”
    In my defense I mumbled away a few accounts. I said I wasn’t there to
show off. I said I wasn’t even there because I found this place particularly
comforting, at least in comparison to my home. I explained that maybe I too
just needed to be out in the open, on the land, off-the-grid, away from the
tank farms, North Marts, and busy co-op stores of northern towns. And as
I rambled on, I finally found my line.
    “I’m just here for the quiet,” I stated solemnly, and convinced myself of it.
    It was loud in Cape Dorset, with its snowmobiles. It was loud in Iqaluit
with all its airplanes. It was loud everywhere, with cars, ferry boats, peo-
ple, dogs, and everything else clamoring for attention: “Me, me, me, watch
out for me, here’s my pic, here’s my update, here’s my tweet!”—everyone
screamed, all the time, everywhere.
    Instead, it was comfortingly quiet here: a sonic emptiness, an explosion of
quiet deadened by snow, choked by ice, walled-in by cold rock, and wrapped
in beaver fur.
    As the jet quietly streaked away and the sky’s depth eventually muted her
engines, I was once again in possession of the exclusive power to control and
order noise. I was the only sovereign territorial power over silence. The only
one with the sonorous might to make snow crackle, to chisel ice, and to let
out a loud and obnoxious sneeze. It was only me: the star of a stage whose
ears were all mine, a big fish in the largest, but most unscripted pond on this
planet. There and then, while camping out on the land, I had found respite
from the electric buzz, the noise of words and thoughts, and the cacophony
of our busy world. For in the end camping out on the land, not unlike off-
grid living, was simply a pursuit of rejuvenating peace and quiet.
    Oh, and . . . no need to jump and run. It was just a cute Arctic fox.


12 The New Quietism

For our first interview on Prince Edward Island we switched our usual
roles: we—not the other way around—took care of answering the ques-
tions. A CBC Radio host did all the asking. This wasn’t the first time.
Over two years of fieldwork, Jon and I met with scores of journalists across
the country to reveal the most interesting stories and discuss the practi-
cal pros and cons of off-grid living. Though we were actively seeking out
publicity for our public ethnography,1 and though we fully understood
the timeliness and newsworthiness of research on renewable energy, the
sheer volume of media attention had surprised us from the very beginning.
Time after time, our journeys across the provinces would yield anywhere
from a half dozen to a dozen radio appearances, print media stories, and
TV news reports.
    We mainly attributed such intense media attention to the “human inter-
est” element of our work: the “colorful characters” (as journalists would often
put it) that we met, and the many off-of-the-beaten-path and unique places
we travelled through. But, more broadly, it was obvious that off-grid living
held a great deal of public appeal and that most people were curious about it,
with more than a few even keen on eventually trying it out themselves. The
popularity of the topic wasn’t always good, however. As part of the process of
dealing with news media from all walks of life, we had noticed that journal-
ists liked to play in particular a pair of different but closely related “angles”
to make their stories appealing to their readers. At first, this reporting bias
annoyed us. Then, over time, we learned to exploit those presumptions to
                                       189
190                              The New Quietism
better portray on our own terms the ethnographic knowledge we wanted to
share. In other words, we learned to hijack those angles.
      The first of these two angles was the “hermit” myth. Journalists and much
of the general public alike somehow assumed that off-gridders were recluse,
antisocial, and isolated from the rest of the world. One of the most common
questions that revealed this attitude was the recurring, “How do you even
find these people if they’re off the grid?” “Well,” I would shock inquirers
with a flippant reply, “I Google them and then I email them.” Being off-
grid did not preclude someone from being online or having a phone, radio,
or television. Most off-gridders were not hermits at all, and by aggressively
defeating that stereotype we would give journalists an easy—and, more
importantly, insightful and truthful—headline to focus on.
      Of all communication media, off-gridders in fact enjoyed the internet the
most. We knew this well in advance of what happened one spring evening
on Prince Edward Island, but the events of that day drove this point home
well enough to outright ridicule any further hermit stereotypes.
      While at our off-grid cabin at Goose River,ii on the eastern end of the
island, every evening at duskiii dozens, perhaps hundreds, of the loudest
crickets would punctually break out in a discordant chorus, shrilling at a
pitch so high that no jumbo jet could match. The noise was short-lived—
perhaps half an hour at most—and therefore not annoying at all but rather
quaint enough to be enchanting. Even more captivating was the fact that the
little critters were utterly invisible, despite our best efforts to locate them in
the swampy areaiv near our cabin and photograph them as they presumably
hopped from blade of grass to blade of grass.
      One day, intrigued more than ever by the ruckus, Jon decided to record
the crickets’ cacophonous performance with his video camera. I happened
to be Skypeing my family back home and having a difficult time communi-
cating through the noise. Then, in a matter of minutes, Jon quickly edited a
short videov and posted it on Facebook, just to be cute and funny. Within
moments, an off-gridder whom we had met during our fieldwork in Ontario
Facebooked Jon to correct him. It was not crickets we heard, she was ada-
mant, but actually spring peepers: a species of small frogs. To double check,
we Googled spring peepers—beasts unknown to our eyes and ears—and
played a sound clip of their chirping. Or better yet, croaking. It was a perfect
ii.
Island_06.jpg
iii.
Island_05.jpg
iv.
Island_04.jpg
v.
                              The New Quietism                                 191
match. The mystery was solved. While the little critters were fascinating
enough in and of themselves, the instantaneous act of communication
between off-grid homes—situated in remote rural communities across the
country to boot—felt simply mind-boggling. Off-grid homes were far from
being recluse hideouts, and thanks to vivid stories like this one more than a
few journalists managed to bust the hermit off-gridder stereotype.
    Despite the baselessness of the myth, we knew very well that Canada
had its fair share of off-grid homes where neither communication media
nor electricity at all could be found. Until our arrival on Prince Edward
Island, we had run across only two offline households, but unsurprisingly
both had electricity. So, when a local gatekeeper told us about Walter and his
internet-free, TV-free, and most notably electricity-free home, we did not
wait a single minute to make the long drive across the island.
Non-Users
We arrived at Walter’s house at 11 o’clock in the morning, accompanied by
Rob, one of our local gatekeepers. Rob thought it would be a good idea to
accompany us to Walter’s, despite the fact that his house was extremely easy
to find, even with the most basic directions. He preferred to introduce us
personally, he stressed, and hang out with us at Walter’s place for a few min-
utes. “I’ll leave shortly after if everything is ok,” he said, putting us somewhat
on edge.
    Rob’s loud knocks on Walter’s front door were met with silence. Nervous
with anticipation, we held our ground a few steps back; the 10 seconds of
un-answering quiet seemingly dragging on forever.
    “His car is not here. He must be out,” Ron guessed. “This is the time of
the day when he occasionally drives to town to run errands.”
    “Ok. What should we do then?”
    “Hang out for a while and come and get me again in an hour or so.”
    “Ok. Are you sure? I mean, we know where the house is now and . . .”
    “No, I’ll go with you,” Rob insisted, adding fuel to our fire. Why was he
so bent on coming along? Did he doubt us? Or Walter?
    The next hour passed languidly, our intimidation growing with every
minute. As the clock finally struck noon we repeated the process from the
start. Again: no answer.
    Moments later, Walter quietly surfaced from his workshop’s door. “How’s
it going, Walter?” Rob inquired. “Are you busy right now? These are the folks
from BC that I told you about.” We ambled toward him, shook hands, and
introduced ourselves. Copious sweat drowned my forehead. Walt mumbled
“hello,” with a confused look. Sensing surprise and perturbation, I explained
192                             The New Quietism
very gingerly our reason for being there and launched into the informed
consent ritual. We generally made introductory contact with interviewees
and “read them their rights” well in advance of showing up at the doorstep,
but in this case no such option had been available.
      “Oh yes, I remember now. That’s fine,” he said. “Come on in, I have
nothing to hide, I enjoy visiting with people.” We walked up the creaking
wooden stairs to his workshop as he held the door open. The large, rectan-
gular-shaped, dimly lit building was filled with a meleevi of old machinery,
discarded TV sets, gardening tools, junk-filled containers, and tables over-
crowded with tools, parts, and flotsam and jetsam dating from each of the
last five decades. Heaps of sawdust were scattered everywhere on the floor,
and a faint smell of mildew and WD-40 infused the air. It was a photogra-
pher’s paradise and Jon wasted no time in drawing out his piece and firing
shots.vii As he did that, Rob began to chitchat with Walt, while I endeavored
to orient myself and gather my thoughts.
      Walt wore a blue and black flannel shirt and dark denims. He also had
an indigo ball cap, eyeglasses, and a bushy gray beard, which together with
his hunched posture made him difficult to scrutinize. I surmised he was
in his late sixties. His benign manners had quickly dissipated our feelings
of intimidation, though his old-time island accent and mordant one-line
answers to our queries still had us feeling uneasy. If there is one thing that I
hate more than asking an interviewee to repeat their words, it is long drawn-
out moments of awkward silence, and alas both were aplenty. Together with
Rob we managed to hurl a few rapid questions about what he was currently
working on, just to keep the conversation going. It turned out he was fixing
a broken-down weed-whacker. More meaningful inquiries ensued. Wisely,
Jon, who had more experience with World Englishes than I, sheathed his
camera away and took it upon himself to lead the dialogue. Rob, in the
meantime, liked what he saw and excused himself.
      Walter had no electricity and that had been the case for some time. A
wind turbine he used to own had broken down, and though he planned on
fixing it, he was still in the midst of saving the necessary funds. Unbothered
by the absence of electricity, Walt used a kerosene lamp to make the light
he needed in order to read at nighttime. The rest of the day was kept sim-
ple, “real simple.” “That’s the way it used to be,” he observed, “it was fine
back in the day when there was no choice, so why wouldn’t it be fine now?”
(Ironically, that’s the very same reason I give to people for not owning a cell
vi.
Island_08.jpg
vii.
Island_09.jpg
                                 The New Quietism                              193
phone). Things get more and more complicated, he went on, cost more and
more money, and then break down. And what’s the point? The voluntary
simplicity principles underlying his argument revealed him to be reflexive
and informed, far from the simpleton his unsophisticated cadence would
have given him off to be.
      Walter grew up on a farm with his family, less than 10 miles away from
where he resided now. It was a mixed farm—they grew a little bit of every-
thing, unlike the potato-obsessed crops of today’s PEI. He moved to his
current house 30 years ago. Back then you’d hardly see a car in these parts,
he recounted. It got busier and busier with time, especially with the growth
of tourism and the wind industry. The hum of the large turbinesviii generat-
ing grid electricity near his house—PEI notably depends on wind energy
for about one-fifth of its electricity needs—didn’t bother him one bit and
he thought highly of their effort to produce clean power. In fact, he said,
it was much better to get power from the wind than to rely on oil. While
he didn’t think of himself as an environmentalist, he made it a point of not
owning a gasoline generator and he planned on investing in a 1-kW off-grid
system—part wind and part solar.
      As for television, he was more interested in the challenge of fixing the
innards of TV sets than in watching their content. “Too much grief,” he
said, dismissing news coverage wholesale in three words. “I don’t need it.”
The internet did not hold much appeal either. “People don’t mind their own
business on that thing,” he stated laconically—and if he referred to the Web
2.0 his critique was perfectly adequate too. “I listen to CBC Radio all the
time, though, day and night.”
      Homes, like all kinds of places, are not necessarily tied to location.
Communication, information, energy, water, and many other flows entangle
domestic environments in far-reaching powerful webs. A house is not a con-
tainer but a “membrane,” “a filter of exteriorities continually entering it and
traversing it.” “Awash in transitivity the home is a node in an indefinitely
extended field of immanence, to which the technologies of transmission
give body.”2 To sever those flows as extensively as Walter had done was a
way of engaging in a reactionary “politics of connectivity”3 in an attempt to
anchor his house in this location.
      Going off-the-grid was then like moving away. If migrating is a way of
“voting with one’s feet,” going off-the-grid as Walter had done was a way
of voting with one’s walls: locking one’s domestic membrane away from the
flows and inputs of the broader society, and sheltering it from the global
exteriorities otherwise constantly traversing it.
viii.
Island_07.jpg
194                            The New Quietism
   The vocabulary of self-sufficiency held no appeal for Walter. He drank
“just a little bit” of alcohol, and cooked himself store-bought “fish, meat, and
potatoes.” For that, he used a woodstove in the winter and a propane-based
one in the summer. He had no refrigerator—an ice box did the job—so his
food was always fresh from the nearby grocer’s. During winter the ice box
in which he kept perishables sat outside in the cold, whereas during sum-
mer and spring he shopped for ice twice a week. He didn’t mind this system
too much, but if he ever got around to installing solar panels or a new wind
turbine—he said with a yearning smile—the first and only electrical treat
he’d get would be . . . a refrigerator. We all had a hearty laugh at that.
   “Would you get anything else?” I asked.
   “No, that’s all I need,” he muttered.
   Outside I had spotted really old-looking twin solar panels, unusually
pointing straight east, right underneath a strangely shaped moss-covered
satellite dish.
   “I noticed that you have solar panels and a satellite dish. Did those things
work at some point?”
   “No, you didn’t,” he stumped me.
   “I didn’t?” I thought with a funny look on my face. Jon glanced at me
funny from behind his viewfinder. Neither solar panels nor satellite dish
worked. Had the solar array functioned it would have only generated about
200 watts or so. Currently also out of order was his plumbing, and as a
result there was no running water in the house. The source of groundwater
would otherwise have been a 60-foot-deep well. He had to get around to
solving the problem, as normally the water he’d pump would be enough
for his needs. The water would then be heated on his woodstove and that’s
how he’d wash himself, whereas the “laundryman” took care of washing his
clothes. In the absence of running water, he borrowed water from a nearby
provincial agency, where he would occasionally take a shower too. Walt
seemed unperturbed about all this; he looked as if he had a million projects
to complete in his garage, including restoring TVs, engines, and taking apart
other pieces of machinery for scraps—like two 1950-era metal panels sitting
obtrusively in his front yard. He received a pension, but he could always use
some extra cash and maybe that was how he generated it. Or maybe he just
did that out of vocation, we could not tell for sure.
   Walter was quite different from all the off-gridders we had met. Neither
particularly well educated nor driven by an articulately critical philosophy,
he was difficult to frame into our existing lens on the off-grid lifeworld. Yet,
the more I struggled to comprehend his speech, the more I realized that my
inability to peg him into a pre-existing category was merely lexical. Walt
may not have cited classics of voluntary simplicity or political autonomism,
                            The New Quietism                               195
but his ideas jelled with those ideologies like lobster and butter. For those
reasons he was a “non-user”4—in a spectacular sense of the term.
    Non-users are non-adopters of a particular technology: people who
choose not to own or utilize a consumer object or service. Non-users are
a diverse group. For some the non-adoption of a particular technology
is driven by lack of interest and perceived advantage.5 For others non-
adoption is the result of historical patterns of social and individual dif-
ference and exclusion.6 For other people non-using is part of a motivated
countercultural stance. Cyclists who refuse to own a car, for example, do
so in order to reduce their carbon footprint and to protest against the
dominance of the automobile and against environmental degradation.7
Then there are non-users whose non-adoption of a particular technology
originates in lack of skills or knowledge. Several individuals who have
never been on the web, for example, perceive themselves to be insuffi-
ciently proficient with computers.8
    Walt had both the skills and enough financial means to bring commu-
nication media into his house, but he chose not to. He owned a car, for
example—a mid- to late- 2000 domestic model that he had recently bought.
But he chose not to travel much. The last time he went off island was at
least two years ago, when he journeyed to Halifax to visit family. “Too many
strangers, too many dope peddlers, too many people you can’t trust,” he
concluded in his unsympathetic review of the city. Much more trustworthy
were his friends at the nearby provincial agency and one of his neighbors,
who checked up on him regularly.
    Without a phone to call for help he knew these friendships were crucial.
Telephones can be useful but they are just too much trouble to own, he
reflected. He used to have a telephone back in the day when there were
still party lines. People would stick their noses into his business, and that
bothered him to no end. “No privacy,” he found. “You’d pick up the phone
and you’d hear a click—someone else was getting on the line,” for the sole
purpose of eavesdropping. That turned him off the whole telecommunica-
tion business and he never felt the need to have that in his house again.
    Off-gridders were non-users of centrally generated and distantly man-
aged electricity and natural gas. That much we knew from the definition
of the term. But throughout our travels we had learned that many of them
also chose not to use, or at least to use very selectively, communication tech-
nologies as well. Though the internet was nearly always present in off-grid
homes, television wasn’t. Only about a quarter of 175 off-gridders had a
cable or satellite TV subscription. Well more than half had a TV set, but
they used it only for DVDs. In a society dominated by the logic of light,
speed, power, instantaneous information, and the virtual mobility afforded
196                             The New Quietism
by connectivity,9 to be as “unplugged” as deeply as Walt was constituted a
revolutionary move.
     Fifty minutes into our visit with Walt I started to get the feeling that his
vernacular one-liners were all the data we could get out of him. I decided to
make a bold move and asked him, with a sense of trepidation, whether he
could give us a tour of his house. His workshop, after all, only held so much
interest to us.
     “I wasn’t expecting you this morning, so I haven’t cleaned up,” he answered
embarrassedly.
     “But that’s ok,” I replied, trying my luck with a joke, “it’s more realistic
that way, isn’t it?”
     His reply was inaudible, then silence followed. Jon turned around toward
me—while Walt looked away focused on his weed-whacker—and shook
his head quickly. I took my hints and decided it was time to thank him for
his hospitality.
     “Yes, t’was my pleasure, come again some other time. I’ll have my wind
turbine up by then.”
Lifestyle Migrants
The next off-grid stereotype we wanted to debunk was the hippie myth. Not
that there is anything wrong with being one, but most of the off-gridders we
met would have denied being hippies. And yet, many members of the gen-
eral public and several journalists alike were surprised to hear that today’s
off-gridders were no flower children. “There is a crucial difference between
1970s hippies or back-to-the-landers of that day and contemporary off-
gridders,” I explained every time.
     The day after our meeting with Walt we had an equally unforgettable
visit. Jim and Judy’s farm,ix well hidden at the end of a 1-kilometer-long
driveway, sat amidst a field of short grasses caressed by a cool ocean breeze.
After ensuring their manically hyperactive dog was more interested in play-
ing catch than in blood-drenched guarding, we slowly stepped outside our
rental car and immediately spotted Jim on a small tractor, mowing grass in
his gorgeous blonde horses’ pen. Judy was inside waiting for us, he hollered
over the tractor’s loud engine, and he’d soon join us too.
     There are two basic groups of people on PEI: locals and CFAs. You are a
local if your family has lived here for five or six generations. And if not, you
are a CFA: a “Come From Away.” Jim and Judy were CFAs, we learned as
we sat down at their living room table, with the warm early afternoon sun
ix.
Island_14.jpg
                               The New Quietism                             197
shining through the large south-facing windows. They had migrated here
from Guelph, Ontario, to follow a dream. They had escaped here—more pre-
cisely—shortly after 9/11, fed-up with their “meaningless” lives filled with
Saturday afternoon car washes, military and corporate careers, and empty
preoccupations with “matching countertop colors and kitchen accessories.”
     “I found my lifestyle in the suburbs too . . .” Hong-Kong-born Judyx
pondered pensively in search of the right word, made to sound even more
impeccable by her polished British English accent, “. . .robotic; as if we were
part of a cult, without wanting to be part of it.”
     Jim quit his job on that fateful September day. His branch manager
refused to listen to his insistent request that employees be sent home to
be with their families while towers crumbled and planes fell out of the sky.
That display of corporate insensitivity was the last straw. While Jim took a
new temporary job as a groundskeeper, together he and Judy painstakingly
weighed their escape options. Then one night, while Judy was fast asleep,
Jim stumbled across a property for sale on the internet—the property was
on West PEI. A former non-commissioned military officer—Jim was a
man of few but deliberately chosen words and clear decisions—he briskly
woke Judy from the bed, consulted with her, and bid on the property on
a whim.
     Jim and Judy were prime examples of what anthropologists, geographers,
and sociologists call amenity migrants or lifestyle migrants.10 Lifestyle
migrants move not out of economic necessity but out of choice for a dif-
ferent way of life; they wish to begin anew, to start over, and to reinvent
themselves.11 These often highly educated and financially stable individuals
are known to move to warmer and gentler places, often far and abroad, but
the promises of a lifestyle migration can often be found even within one’s
own country.12
     Just about all the Canadian off-gridders we met on our journeys were
invariably seeking the amenities that many other lifestyle migrants sought
elsewhere in the world, whether in Costa Rica or in Costa del Sol: a slower
pace of life in tune with natural rhythms, a more intimate communion with
place and the natural environment, the opportunity to be one’s own boss or
to enjoy retirement or semi-retirement, a more basic or “simpler” form of
living, and the time to downshift and dedicate oneself to one’s hobbies and
passions.13
     If buying property half a continent away without as much as a quick visit
seemed absurd, seeing the newly purchased land for the first time struck
Jim and Judy as even more surreal. “There was absolutely nothing here, just
x.
Island_13.jpg
198                          The New Quietism
trees,” Judy smiled. “My dad—who was here with me—felt like we were in
the Burmese jungle.” Judy’s father, sitting at the table next to her, smiled as
he heard Judy tell the story. Nevertheless, up for the challenge, they imme-
diately cleared space for the driveway and a lot for the house. The internet
taught them how to build their new home with the lumber from the trees
they cut. A few conversations with local renewable energy suppliers gave
them the additional knowledge needed to set up a small hybrid system—
solar and wind—to power their domestic needs. Next thing you know their
teenage daughter—literally pulled from a “normal” suburban life filled with
swimming lessons and shopping mall outings—was furnished with home-
made snowshoes to trek to the end of their snowy driveway and sent to
school out in the country. “She wasn’t impressed.”
   Though they articulated it in different tones, Walter and Jim and Judy
shared a common aspiration for a better way of life. Walter’s quest was for
a simple way of living unencumbered by unnecessary technologies, uncom-
plicated by material possessions, and undisturbed by the “grief ” carried by
communication media and the rest of the world, dope-peddlers and all. Jim
and Judy’s pursuit was instead focused on a more sophisticated practice of
healthy and sustainable living, mixed with a DIW ethic and a critical stance
toward consumerism and corporate greed. But both households, in the end,
sought nothing but quiet and peace of mind.
   Just like them, so many other Canadians had moved off-the-grid to get
away from a postmodern culture and neo-liberal society that constantly
spreads its tentacles farther and farther into private homes and personal
lives through its seductive images of “the good life.” A good life that is,
unfortunately, also superficial, commodified, and unsustainable. And what
they found by moving away was often the same—an alternative, semi-
autonomous, and protected zone: a “stilled” place feeling like a refuge from
the dromophilia of the outer world,14 an oasis, and a safe haven of personal
authenticity. This stillness was a pause, a bracketing, a friction in the onflow
of everyday life.15 It was a “willful unmoving” that took “a stand” as a “coun-
terpoint to the nomadic metaphysics of flow.”16
   Similar to the “hippie” generation that “dropped out” of mainstream soci-
ety in the late 1960s and 1970s and sought a better life by getting back-to-
the-land,17 modern-day off-gridders chose to disconnect from “the grid”
and all “it” stood for in a Quietist attempt to take control of their personal
lives and take care of themselves and their families. “Quietism” is an old
doctrine. Within both Christianity and Islam, Quietism refers to a retreatist
withdrawal from political affairs motivated by disinterest and skepticism in
one’s ability to affect change. Instead of open rebellion toward heresy and
sin, and instead of militantly pushing for collective amelioration, religious
                            The New Quietism                             199
Quietists generally sought personal serenity by way of contemplative still-
ness and communion with God.
   Quietism is a label that was also applied to the 1970s back-to-the-
landers who abdicated their former activist commitments to social change
and sought instead personal peace in rural refuges.18 In their case, godly
devotion was generally substituted with variably intense pantheist forms
of mysticism and non-institutionalized spiritualism. Like their 1970s
counterparts, Canadian off-gridders had obvious Quietist-like tenden-
cies. Disenchanted with mainstream living, neo-liberalism, consumerism,
large institutions, the power of the state to affect change, and many of
the currently available political alternatives, off-gridders sought personal
contentment by migrating to idyllic and peaceful surrounds away from
grief and noise. In these spaces they took care of their own existence by
cultivating peace and quiet, and by rarely engaging in direct, collective
struggles.
   In contrast to the Quietist godly devotion and mysticism of earlier back-
to-the-landers, these “New Quietists” simply drew great sensual enjoyment
from the secular pleasures of life and the comforts and conveniences of
renewable energy and domestic technologies. And instead of the asceticism
of earlier Quietists, as we have seen, New Quietists practiced an alternative
hedonism that valued sources of pleasure that were as sustainable and as
local as possible—sources of pleasure that had been carefully wrestled away
from the production and distribution networks of global capitalism. So, in
short, off-gridders were no hippies.
   Then again, no off-gridders defined themselves as New Quietists, of
course. New Quietism was not an existing movement, but rather an idea
we made up: a creative name that encompassed very diverse lifestyles and
many different quests for a better way of life. New Quietism therefore
was not a structured ideology, but rather a series of practical “tactics”19
through which off-gridders reshaped relations with distant exteriorities,
chipping away at the dominant infrastructures of consumption without
challenging them head-on. Through their artful ways of “making do,”20
off-gridders across Canada merely created domestic spaces where they
enjoyed a safe remove from “the law of a foreign power.”21 There, they
took some degree of autonomy,22 building contained alternative power
constellations in which they sought and often found, if nothing else, per-
sonal fulfillment.
   Again these were modest, but meaningful and powerful, tactics.
Generating clean electricity, creating heat through renewable resources,
growing organic food, harvesting water, and minimizing waste were just
some of the many ways in which New Quietists drew gratification from
200                          The New Quietism
their lifestyle. And so, through their tactics and their enjoyment of all
the amenities they managed to obtain responsibly and often renewably,
New Quietist off-gridders indirectly offered the rest of us constructive
answers to global problems generated by shortsighted consumerism.
Their cultivation of peace, quiet, and stillness “as a capacity to do things”
thus posed “a solution to the problems of consumption, movement, and
activity . . . and a powerful trope for environmental, economic and ethical
sustainability.”23
In Search of Stillness
The coffee percolator had been gurgling on the two-burner propane stove
for a while, but first there was a story to finish. Seated tensely on the edge of
their kitchen table chairs, Jim and Judy spoke with heavy hearts and sharp
words. They had a sobering perspective on off-grid living they wanted to
tell the world about, they said. Driving to their place that morning I had a
feeling this would be the case, as I knew their house was up for sale. Their
lifestyle plan, as it turned out, had a serious kink and they were right in the
midst of considering another lifestyle change, but this one deeply unwanted.
It was the first time we had come in direct contact with the disillusions of
off-grid living. I was well aware that no off-gridder found their life to be
perfect, of course, and in the past I had even managed to find and interview
a few individuals who had given up on off-grid living for health, work, or
other practical reasons. But never before had Jon and I witnessed a dream
imploding right before our eyes.
    With a small military pension to serve as a steady cash flow, all that Jim
and Judy initially had to worry about was generating a small but mean-
ingful income from their off-grid eco-tourism business. A lovely wooden
cabin had been built to accommodate visitors interested in a bucolic energy-
independent getaway, and an educational and health program—inclusive of
horse-assisted therapy and organic agricultural teachings—had been put in
place. A well-designed website and a thorough marketing plan had been
launched. But this was West PEI: not exactly the kind of place you stumble
upon on your way to Disney World. The world from which they had run
away had never bothered to show up at their doorstep, or at least not in suf-
ficient numbers. The people who had come were touched and perhaps for-
ever changed, especially the children, Judy explained, but it wasn’t enough.
Soon afterward both Jim and Judy had to take up full-time jobs in town to
make up for the missing cash flow. And with that adjustment their off-grid
lifestyle had forever changed.
                               The New Quietism                              201
     As the oblivious rooster continued to chant blissfully outside, Judy excused
herself to finally fill her cup of coffee. The small and laborious camp-style
propane stove was just one of the many inconveniences they were no longer
tolerant enough to endure. Coping with the many infant-like demands of an
off-grid homestead was troublesome enough when they had time to spare,
but it was simply unbearable after they had resorted to making time for
paid employment too. With every day that Jim and Judy worked away from
home, their everyday life became more and more exhausting, their domestic
technologies more uncooperative, and their busy rhythms increasingly dis-
cordant with the natural cycles they had sought. Moreover, Judy’s father had
fallen ill and had moved in with them, he too needing their attention. All
that just couldn’t go on much longer.
     It was almost time for lunch. We reassured our hosts that we were in no
rush. They had a long story they wanted us to document. It was an aggra-
vating narrative filled with upsetting turns of events. There were “$2,000
bills here, $2,000 upgrade estimates there,” Jim recounted, “there is some-
thing about that number, everything seems to cost no less than $2,000.”
And with every expense came more disheartening realizations and broken
promises. The plot was thick: a solar hot water collector that never worked,
which caused Judy to take “bird baths” with stove-warmed water and Jim to
shower at work; a tiny and inefficient woodstove, which would force them
to wake up to an alarm call in the middle of the night to restock it; a greater
reliance on purchasing propane and ready-cut firewood, which challenged
their values of self-sufficiency; and a temperamental groundwater well and
plumbing system,xi which required aggressive monitoring and harsh con-
servation practices. “It’s just too much,” Judy confided, sounding hurt and
deflated. “We came here for a simpler life, and what’s simpler about this?
Absolutely nothing.”
     It was a tough pill to swallow for Jon and me too. Our encounters with
off-gridders had been so uniformly upbeat and positive that at times it was
hard to remember that centrally generated heat and electricity could be a
good thing for anyone. Our fledgling impression of the lifestyle had been
positive but balanced up to that point, but now more than ever it was evi-
dent that off-grid assemblages weren’t going to work under every circum-
stance, and that the lifestyle they enabled was at times deeply limiting and
constraining. Jim and Judy’s reminder that it was very difficult for a busy
dual-earning couple to find the time to take care of off-grid domestic duties
had also challenged both of our personal dreams to get off-the-grid with
xi.
Island_12.jpg
202                          The New Quietism
our respective families one day. I quietly ate the sandwiches that Judy had
prepared, absorbed in reflective thought.
    In large part, the cause of Jim and Judy’s troubles could be attributed
to the destination of their lifestyle migration. Despite its beauty, West
PEI was not a prime tourist site. Because of its limited development for
sizeable tourist flows, Jim and Judy could never sufficiently profit from
the place where they sought escape. They had just gone too far. Without
relocating very far at all, Walter might have gone too far too. His non-
use of electricity and many communication media had obviously caused
him some degree of inconvenience and created a somewhat uncomfortable
level of isolation, which was particularly risky at his age in case of a health
emergency.
    You may try to seek them, but pure stillness and remove are impossible
to achieve. The ideal—the very aspiration—of stillness and remove was irre-
sistibly motivating, and that’s why most off-gridders dreamed the world
could be slowed down and maybe even stopped and forgotten in the right
slice of paradise. But by moving farther and farther away from the rest of
the society, in the end, it was easy to need it more. Stilling can never be an
utter separation, a final severing, a complete disconnection. Stilling simply
“institutes a connection,”24 creating the conditions for newer, different rela-
tions. The New Quietist quest for stillness had its obvious shortcomings,
disillusions, risks, and challenges. Stillness, like other forms of immobility25
was always relative and inevitably characterized by multiple flows, contra-
dictions, compromises, and tensions. Stillness could never quite be a full
“gesture of refusal.”26
    Like Jim and Judy, off-gridders all over Canada had plenty of rea-
sons to be enamored with their idyllic islands of peace and quiet. But
by disconnecting from distant providers of power, heat, and water, off-
grid households invariably took on a great deal of domestic work that
on-grid households need not tackle. Work like collecting wood, growing
food, maintaining fickle technologies in stable working conditions, tend-
ing to repairs and regular maintenance, monitoring water, and exercising
patience when resources were not available, not working, or not afford-
able could take a serious toll on anyone. To boot, by moving far away
from urban centers, off-gridders exposed themselves to the risk of isola-
tion, which challenged them in case of emergencies and financial need.
So, despite their skillful quest for a more self-sufficient and simpler way
of living, it was common for off-gridders to experience a greater deal of
mundane challenges than the rest of us. While these demands were gener-
ally met with unwavering resolve and often even embraced as a necessary
                            The New Quietism                              203
part of life, off-grid living was more laborious and time-consuming than
some people would like their domestic life to be.27
    Off-grid lifestyle migrants were able to carve out stilled safe havens by
strategically adopting New Quietist tactics and by assembling unique power
constellations. By doing so they achieved various degrees of the peace, quiet,
stillness, harmony with place, contentment, slowness, simplicity, and seren-
ity they aspired to. But their homes were neither fully autonomous from the
ills and the perils of the world they left behind nor immune to its forces.
Off-gridders’ quest for remove and stillness—just like many other lifestyle
migrants’ quest for a sea change—always came with a revealing lesson. No
act of disconnection, no remove, no escape can ever be complete. No off-
grid household could last long without understanding that, in the end, no
home can be an island.
    We slowly walked outside to throw the dog something to chase and
to give the goats and the horses somebody to show off to. A tall, grey,
metal smokestack stood upright on the dark chestnut-colored roof of the
house, pointing straight to an azure sky. Next to it four blades belonging
to a small wind turbine rested still, on standby for a moment’s whiff. I
strolled with Jim toward the fence and wordlessly we together shot an
eager glance at the ocean, the aroma of low tide lingering in the air. We
would soon be called upon to cross that body of water, Jim to find work
and an uncertain future in Alberta’s tar sands, and Jon and I to drift to
Newfoundland for the last leg of a long journey that had finally yielded
clarity for our quest.
    “You know, Jim, you could always upgrade your system and bring it up to
a couple of kilowatts and make things a bit easier on yourselves . . .”
    He replied with a few moments of silence, and then reminded me about
that magic 2,000 number. That’s all the answer I could bear to hear.
                                      ***
    Before this book went to press, I wrote an email to Jim and Judy. Jim was
now working in Alberta hauling water for the oil rigs, occasionally return-
ing home to PEI to be with Judy. Though the compromise with his values
was a jarring one and the work unfulfilling, the relatively well-paid job was
allowing them to save money for the upgrades their house needed. In the
meantime, the farm was still for sale. Jim and Judy’s dream for independence
was on hold, but for the moment still alive.
    “As far as our future, oh for a crystal ball,” Judy wrote. “It has taken a
year just for the fall out of my dad’s death which happened this week last
204                              The New Quietism
year, to feel as though there is any semblance of relief both emotionally and
financially. My mum is still in a nursing home nearby and I am still deal-
ing with an injured back and unable to return to work. We have to hire a
handyman to do what Jim used to do for the horses and the outside work,
as I am unable to do anything physical. I don’t know what to tell you except
I love the farm and the feeling I have here is very rooted to the earth. The
nature surrounding me somehow feeds me, it is an organic feeling. But with-
out adequate financial resources and factoring in injury, age, health and the
necessity for Jim to work in the oil patch I am sure that if a young couple
were to magically want to start their own dream of small scale farming off
the grid I would be able to step aside and know that what we created would
continue and this existence has been worthy.”


13 A Better Way of Life?

It was in the early morning of the 10th of June, 2013, that the last
journey began. Desultory and sleepy-eyed, I dragged my frayed ruck-
sack into the domestic departure hall of the Vancouver Airport, scout-
ing for the fastest way past exuberant vacationers and equally erratic
rolling s­ uitcases tightly leashed to their button-down business owners.
A glance at the bright and uninviting electronic glare of the self-check-
in terminals reminded me that, thankfully, by now I had accumulated
enough air miles to qualify for the privilege of human contact. I made
a beeline for the deserted frequent-flier counter and the bored-looking
agent behind it.
   “Where are you flying to, sir?”
   “Deer Lake.”
   “Deer Lake,” she confirmed in a sullen tone. “It’s a very popular destina-
tion today.”
   “I can only imagine,” I smiled and heaved the several pounds of extra
baggage—tent, inflatable mattresses, and the rest of the camping gear—on
the scale.
   “Have a good camping trip.”
   Camping, this time, wasn’t part of the research agenda. With a few spare
dollars in the budget it wasn’t a fiscal restraint, either. It simply was, Jon and I
agreed, a more fitting experience. Unable to find off-grid cabins for rent this
time, we had surmised that camping in national and provincial parks would pro-
vide us with final, longer-lasting tastes of the off-grid life: a warm fire, a simple
but efficient shelter, self-catered meals made from unpretentious ingredients,
                                        207
208                             A Better Way of Life?
and a clear skyii for evening entertainment. To boot, for some obscure reason
incomprehensible to both our scientific minds, we found that a cold creek kept
a bottle of beer infinitely cooler than a hotel’s mini-fridge.
      Many hours later we settled into a fir-shaded grassy site, as the early
evening Newfoundland sun slid shyly behind the western mountains. Gros
Morne National Park’s Lomond campground was tucked alongside the
fjord-like East Arm of the Gulf of St. Lawrence, meandering away into steep
hiking trails and hidden kayaking routes. It was a pity to be on a schedule.
While a tinfoil-wrapped dinner of fish and potatoes slowly roasted over the
campfire, we idly compared notes about that afternoon’s interview.
      Karen and Mike had met in industrial southeastern Ontario 11 years
before and tied the knot in 2005. Mike had grown up in Western Newfound-
land and, like many other islanders, had migrated to seek work elsewhere in
mainland Canada. Karen hadn’t left her native Ontario but had been dream-
ing about a radically different life for most of her life. “Homesteading has been
my dream ever since I was six years old,” she confided. “I didn’t know what
off-grid meant but my original dream was to go into the woods, build a cabin
by myself, and do it all by hand.” Increasingly fed-up with noise, traffic, and
the hustle and bustle of southeastern Ontario, Mike looked back wistfully to
the pleasures of simpler times on the island, remembering with fondness the
time he spent with his large family at his grandmother’s rustic cabin.
      After their wedding in 2005, they decided to honeymoon in Newfound-
land, since Karen had always fantasized about visiting the Atlantic rock that
her husband used to call home. “We got here by ferry,” Mike told the story,
“and half an hour into the drive from Port-Aux-Basques she slapped me into
my right arm and said, ‘How could you possibly leave all this?’” The year after,
they deserted Ontario. By the time of our visit they had lived at their solar-
powered 600-square-foot cabin—set within a forested 1-acre property—for
three blissful years. They had never felt so relaxed, so much at peace before.
“It’s the simplicity of the lifestyle,” Karen explained. “I’d rather spend as little
time at work as possible and spend my time here doing my gardening, my read-
ing, my learning, and the things I enjoy. . . . I could even live more primitively
than this,” she confessed, “spending less money on propane on more on books.”
Despite the vicinity of the nearest electricity pole, going on-grid was never
even a consideration; the prospect of going off-the-grid was as unintimidating
as they had dreamed. “It was natural for us,” Karen explained. “We knew we’d
be comfortable with oil lamps and a woodstove. It was just very natural.”
      Call it “simple,” “basic,” “primitive,” or whatever you wish, but it was obvi-
ous that there was a feeling and an atmosphere of “romance” about both
camping and off-grid living that had a uniquely powerful appeal. Not the
ii.
                                A Better Way of Life?                               209
sappy romantic draw of a Tinseltown first-date flick, of course, but a more
transcendentally romantic love of place that had pulled hundreds of off-
gridders into the lifestyle and that constantly seduced many on-gridders to
daydream about it. It was evident not only in our latest encounters, but in
many of the conversations we had with people across Canada. It was a fron-
tier spirit, a rugged sense of self-reliance and adventure that had also pro-
foundly inspired Henry David Thoreau, who in Walden famously explained:
      I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the
      essential facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and
      not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived. I did not wish to
      live what was not life, living is so dear; nor did I wish to practice resigna-
      tion, unless it was quite necessary. I wanted to live deep and suck out all
      the marrow of life, to live so sturdily and Spartan-like as to put to rout all
      that was not life, to cut a broad swath and shave close, to drive life into a
      corner, and reduce it to its lowest terms.1
      I suppose this romance consisted of a feeling of communion, of belong-
ing, of oneness with time,iii place, and nature. It was the antinomy of the
romance and adventure one could find under the tarry roofs of exotic resort
chains, gated McMansions, or rows of houses shadowing one another in the
anonymity of peripheries worldwide. It was the promise of life lived in the
open, nothing more and nothing less.
      Karen and Mike thought everyone could manage to live off-the-grid. “It
just takes the right attitude,” they believed. Others were similarly optimistic.
It doesn’t take much more than common sense. Skills can be acquired. Help
is always available if there is something you can’t do on your own. It just takes
willpower and motivation. Such were the key ingredients these optimists felt
were necessary. And of course, you might argue, why couldn’t everyone do it?
After all, our species has survived off-the-grid since the beginning.
      Kathy and Fred, whom we had met the day before, belonged to a less
optimistic group. “It takes an especially stubborn person to live off-the-grid,”
Fred thought, “someone who doesn’t give up easily.” Someone who is not
easily intimidated. Someone with a great deal of self-efficacy and confidence.
And someone “with a strong interest in the lifestyle,” they believed, “and with
many skills too: you have to be handy, you have to be someone who grew up
around family and friends who taught you how to fend for yourself.”
      As someone who grew up without those skills and confidence in my
domestic self-reliance, I began the fieldwork in 2011 in full agreement with
iii.
210                        A Better Way of Life?
Kathy and Fred’s argument. But it wasn’t just about my own skills. As a level-
headed social scientist, I was also well aware that certain personal and social
barriers would prevent more than just the unskilled, the easily-defeated, and
the self-doubting to live off-grid. People with severe physical challenges, for
example, would find it impossible to live such a self-reliant and demanding
lifestyle. Families and individuals dealing with demanding and inflexible work
schedules would equally be hard-pressed to move into TLC-needing off-grid
homes. But as time went on, and as I encountered more and more off-gridders
like me without a particularly qualifying background or a definable talent for
self-sufficiency, I began to feel that with the right disposition learning to live
off-grid wouldn’t be prohibitively difficult. Not easy, of course, but far from
impossible. Living off-the-grid was something you learned along the way
because you needed to, just like you learn everything else in your life.
Amidst (Fallen) Trees
Morning came. Air hissed out of our thin mattresses and metal tent pegs
squeezed out of the earth. Lock, stock, and barrel we made for town, retrac-
ing our footsteps on the muddy banks of the river. We crossed the village
boundaries with the mid-afternoon sun’s sharp blades knifing through our
parched skin, and set out to look for a man who would be willing to drive us
across the island. We knew it wouldn’t be an easy proposition. At this time
of the year, the few hirable drivers willing to brave the fiery heat and the
constant threats of separatist hijackings along the route were few and far
between the scores of senseless adventurers trying to reach St. John’s busy
port. We eventually settled with Bruce, a cantankerous old man whose local
tongue escaped our most basic comprehension and prevented all attempts at
dialogue along the way, negotiating penny by penny and ultimately agreeing
on a fare that seemed to anger us all immeasurably.
    The next 36 hours of travail lingered in a toxic blur of dust and blistering
sun, which we relished from the half-squatted comfort of a wooden plank
bolted across the bed of Bruce’s 1980 Toyota truck. The piste we followed
through the mind-numbingly vast landscape—with occasional detours
through desolate outposts to scavenge odd pieces of chicken wire or motley
rusting parts to repair Bruce’s irascible Toyota—turned out to be safe but far
from sound. Crater after crater, the shock-less Toyota exerted a bumpy revenge
on our hard bargaining, delivering us at the edge of town in the middle of the
dark night bruised, rattled, and more disoriented than a moose on a parkway.
    No, actually, it didn’t go like that at all. Rather, our Air Canada flight—
which we had booked weeks earlier on the net—departed and landed on
time at YYT, where our reserved rental SUV equipped with AC, GPS, and
XM radio awaited us. I wrote the passage above while bored on the plane,
                               A Better Way of Life?                               211
wondering what it might have been like to do fieldwork in a distant conti-
nent where off-grid was the norm and friction-less mobility the exception.
But in spite of the reduced potential for relaying an adventurous narrative, I
concluded, I liked our field site just fine. Surely it made for a less than glori-
ous arrival into our final destination,iv but our feelings of elation and accom-
plishment were no less intense for it. Soberly, we delayed all calls for rest and
celebration to first make time for a few interviews with local media outlets.
     We began the last interview by reflecting on what had surprised us most
over the two years of fieldwork. Jon and I agreed that it was off-gridders’
inventiveness and resourcefulness. It had been remarkable to step into home
after home and observe how comfortable and convenient an existence off-
the-grid could be. The most beautiful province we had visited, we both
confessed, was the Yukon—without counting our own British Columbia, of
course. As for regrets, I wished we had managed to be hosted by an off-grid
Mennonite or Hutterite family, but both religious groups constantly get
more than their fair share of attention from prying researchers of one ilk or
another. Then the questions became more poignant.
     “No, I don’t think everyone can do it,” I opined about the feasibility of off-
grid living on a mass scale, playing out the script I had loosely rehearsed in
my mind during the last year. “It’s easier than it may seem, but it would still be
very difficult for many people to abandon, or at least redefine, the sources and
meanings of comfort and convenience that our consumer culture has allowed
us to get used to.” I explained that our expectations for an easy life have esca-
lated a great deal, and even though the required attitude change is something
we can all pull off, for some people it would be extremely difficult.
     “So, what’s the point then?” I was quizzed unsympathetically by the skep-
tical man. “If not everyone can do it, how is off-grid living the solution to
our energy-scarce future?”
     “It’s not the solution,” I responded, defending myself and off-grid living
alike, suddenly feeling like an unofficially appointed spokesperson. “There
is no single magic pill solution to problems of energy scarcity. There is no
single alternative future. Environmental scientists would be the first ones to
argue that any solution to both present and future energy scarcity problems
will require a richness of different approaches and a multiplicity of diverse
energy sources and lifestyles.”
     “Then you’re not saying that we should all live off-the-grid?”
     “No, I would never suggest that.” I sounded a tad grumpy but hopefully
convincing. I generally hated this devil’s advocate style of journalistic ques-
tioning, but by now I didn’t mind being challenged. Given that the fieldwork
was almost over, I actually appreciated taking stock of the last two years of
iv.
212                            A Better Way of Life?
research and the chance to wrap things up. I went on: “Off-grid living is a
lifestyle. Just like I believe in cultivating a variety of energy sources, I believe
in the value of a society made more vibrant and stronger by a large variety
of lifestyles. Just like it would make no sense to suggest we should all work
at the same job, pray to the same gods, wear the same clothes, or live in the
same kinds of places, I don’t believe that we should all live the same way.”
     “Do you think that in the future we will all be living off-the-grid?”
     “No. Given the kind of society we live in today it would make no sense for
each and every one of us to live independently from one another. By pool-
ing together our energy resources most people, especially those who live in
densely-populated areas, can potentially live more efficiently. . . . In the future
though,” I uncharacteristically hazarded to predict, “we will need to learn to
rely more on renewable sources of energy and conserve more. We will need to
be more mindful and respectful of the limited resources our planet can offer.”
     I gathered my thoughts for a moment as his shorthand writing caught up.
“We will need to be more sensitive, flexible, adaptable, and quite frankly less
spoiled,” I preached. “People who live off-grid can teach the rest of us a lot about
our collective future. They can teach us many serviceable skills and useful atti-
tudes. Their homes are less some kind of subcultural or utopian space than they
are as a learning lab where a more sustainable tomorrow is being experimented
on, today. And we can all learn from that.” On that last point we shook hands
and parted ways, setting out on the road for our final house call.
                                             ***
     Flash forward to the next day now, to words lifted from Jon’s field journal:
     From my cot late in the morning I lift the corner of a makeshift curtain and see
     the source of the racket that woke me up: Tenzing feeding branches into a gas-
     powered wood-chipper before disappearing along a wooded trail on an ATV,
     soon to return with another wagonload of deadfall. Hurricane Lesliev brought
     surprising devastation to the shores of Newfoundland, we learned from Ian
     and Meranda last night. The two are in the finishing phases of building cabins
     and assembling other technologies—including the generation of methane gas
     through biomass naturally decaying and rotting into fuel—for the yoga, artist,
     and spiritual community they host on their five-acre site. Along with Tenzing,
     a long-time friend visiting from Tibet, they have spent the last little while
     clearing wind-blown trees from future building sites and milling logs into
     lumber suitable for construction.
         Besides functioning as an alarm call the curtain also serves as a baffle against
     draughts in the unfinished main building we’ve been sleeping in, but the chilly
v.
                                 A Better Way of Life?                                    213
      coastal air pushing its way through an invisible gap in the envelope is quickly
      defeating my reluctance to get out of bed to help with the yard work. Overhead,
      the soaring ceiling of this architectural marvel—hand-hewn beams joined with-
      out any metal fastenings—reminds me of the day’s agenda: I had promised Ian
      I would lend a hand with the milling of logs on his 18” bandsaw mill.vi Eager
      to learn more about this process and its implications for sustainable building,
      I tumble out of bed and towards the coffee promised by the plume of smoke
      rising from the chimney of Ian and Meranda’s cabin across the compound.
          Phillip is already up and is doing his own milling around the log-sorting site
      while Ian prepares logs to be cut into slabs by the motorized saw. Milling lum-
      ber is not a skill Phillip or I possess, but as I ready the camera on the lightweight
      tripod that doubles as a steadicam I can see that he has learned a great deal
      already: I zoom in and follow the whirling dust of the saw as it slides the length
      of the log, and, pulling back, record as Phillip hammers a wooden wedge into
      the space left behind to ensure the weight of the offcut doesn’t pinch the blade.
      Milling lumber was not something Ian had been formally trained for,
either. With a PhD in biology and a career spanning two decades in federal
environmental conservation, Ian—donning a blue rain jacket, sturdy leather
gloves, and a trucker hat—“wasn’t making enough change,” he calmly
reflected as he paused from unwinding his red Hud-Son Oscar back into
the milling position. “After a while,” he continued, “you come to understand
that all this process that we have in our society that’s supposed to make this
a better place, a better environment, is not really working.” Disillusioned,
he realized that “the only thing you can really change is how you can bring
yourself out in the world.”
      And precisely through his land is how he brought himself out in 2005.
Three years before, he had met Meranda, who had recently returned to New-
foundland from a 17-year-long stint in India practicing yoga and meditation.
Meranda and Ian looked to this parcel of land on the Avalon Peninsula as the
ideal place to cultivate spirituality and environmental sustainability: a har-
moniously symbolic and material cut from the outside world, “a place where
people can come to experience an alternative way to be” either for a short
retreat or a longer period of time. “People who live in the cities,” Meranda
had explained the day before at mealtime, “don’t have a place to go to take a
break, so when they hear about the Tree of Lifevii and what we’re doing out
here, their eyes pop out of their head, like ‘wow, this is exactly what I want.’
They can come out here and rest in nature,” away from the overwhelming
busyness of their day-to-day lives, in search of a sense of community with
one another and with place.
vi.
vii.
214                              A Better Way of Life?
       Interrupted by nothing but the usual suspects—unevenly available
resources, a few technical setbacks, uncooperative elements, and an unwill-
ingness to rush things through—the process of building both living space and
intentional community was unfolding slowly, without the pressures of mort-
gages, contractors, profit, or an uncompromising sense of deadlines. Like a
tree, it was simply growing organically, at its own pace. And, as a matter of fact,
by lending a hand with the milling we had become part of that growth too.
       We had been milling for over two hours and it was time for a break. Tenz-
ing was eager to show us his favorite hideout in the forest—a picture-perfect
waterfallviii whose gushing had formed a natural swimming hole amidst
moss-covered rocks and verdant shrubs—so I followed himix and Ian along
for the short jaunt, Jon trailing behind us hoping to record the last bytes of
digital footage. Our interview and visit were just about over, and so were
months in the field.
       It isn’t part of this ethnographer’s job description to state conclusively
whether this was definitely a better way of life across the board—a task bet-
ter left to existential philosophers and best-selling off-grid manual authors.
But it was clearly a better way of life for Tenzing, Meranda, Ian, and several
dozen off-gridders we had met throughout Canada. A better way of life that
was, depending on whom you’d ask, relished in the heightened sustainability,
the self-reliance, the involvement, the sense of responsibility, the remove, the
skillful confidence, the comfort, the convenience, the sense of place, and the
small pleasures of a newly found “freedom:” the simple “freedom,” in Ian’s
words, “that you’re waking up in the morning and that you don’t need to be
anywhere else,” the genuine freedom to choose how to occupy yourself, how
to invest your time and utilize your energy, your own energy.
       So, maybe off-grid living wasn’t for all of us, and maybe it wasn’t always as
sustainable as it could have been, but it was certainly a better way of life for those
who had managed to make their wish come true; a wish “to live deliberately, to
front only the essential facts of life . . . to live deep and suck out all the marrow
of life, to live so sturdily and Spartan-like as to put to rout all that was not life.”2
The Way Back
“If you don’t like the weather, just wait fifteen minutes,” was the locals’ favor-
ite expression everywhere we went. Newfoundlanders liked to say it too,
more rightly so than anyone else. And actually they could have made the
same point about their landscape: “If you don’t like the landscape, just drive
viii.
ix.
                               A Better Way of Life?                              215
for fifteen minutes.” Keen on seeing more of the island that had preoccupied
our minds for the previous two years, we left Ian and Meranda’s place en
route to a long loop back to St. John’s, winding south around the Avalon
Peninsulax and then up the coast through Chance Cove and Witless Bay.
Despite the fatigue, the small but measurable loss in attention, the home-
sickness, and a shared eagerness to move on with the next creative phases of
the ethnography—the writing, the editing, and the distribution—the slow
drive back gave us a chance to cling on to the now rapidly dissipating jour-
ney. Ethnographers like to wander as much as they like to wonder, after
all. So as misty barren highlands sequined by stray rock gave way to rainy
timberlands, and then as muffled pebbly shores of time-forgotten fishing
outports gave way to dizzyingly windy cliffs seemingly plucked away from
the green meadows of Ireland, Newfoundland and its skies and seas surged
and transformed before us one last time.
     Mid-coast, at Ferryland, we pulled over for a quick hike around the narrow
cape and historic lighthouse. As our fieldwork was finally behind us, we set the
tripod against a sharp-pitched matted bluff and recorded a final on-camera
self-interview, describing “the making of ” the film in methodological detail.
Like a constantly evolving landscape, ethnography jolts you at every turn. It’s
easy to draw an itinerary, to sketch in advance a clear sense of direction as well
as a starting and an ending point, but like the undertaking of every journey, the
doing of ethnography never unfolds too linearly, too predictably. Sure there
are lines you can draw across the map of a field, but through the actual process
of wondering and wandering you always take those lines for a walk.3 Or better
yet, the lines take you for a walk, changing you as much as you change them.
     Someone once said that the mark of a good journey is not whether it yields
answers to the questions you had in the beginning, but instead whether it gen-
erates questions you never thought of asking in the first place. And so this
journey did. The disenchantment and disillusion with shortsighted global eco-
nomic and political leadership and with the stunted evolution of international
environmental policies to meet a growing demand on the planet’s resources
had me wondering at the outset whether off-grid living was an answer—a
better way of life than the defeatism and dependency so many of us have suc-
cumbed to. Now I knew it was at least one very small answer, a difficult but
prodigious personal way forward on the path to a more responsible future. But
before this journey started I never thought of asking how it might feel to detour
from our broad collective path and go back, how it might feel to question the
inevitability of the future and oppose, through a positive alternative, the blind
march onward we collectively seem to have surrendered to join.
x.
216                        A Better Way of Life?
    As more forests are slashed and burned, as new pipelines, dams, and
mines are being planned and developed around the world every day to feed
a growing appetite for worldwide consumption, we are reminded by cool-
headed politicians that we can’t stop progress and development. But can’t
we, really? Wouldn’t we want to stop and turn around if we finally realized
we are nearing the edge of a cliff ? Wouldn’t we want to go back and re-learn
basic regenerative life skills made oblivious at the hands of careless conces-
sion? Wouldn’t we want to re-discover the alternative hedonism of a modest
and onerous consumption? Wouldn’t we want to re-learn to appreciate a life
lived in deep involvement with the resources made available by the places we
inhabit, rather than in spite of them? And above all, wouldn’t we embrace and
enjoy—rather than endure—such regression? For the next 12 months, back
at our respective homes, we worked on the implications of these questions—
I mainly with the memories and words and Jon with the sounds and images
we had painstakingly collected through our travels.
    I typed the last pages of the first draft of this book during a long, foggy
autumn from the comfort of my island home. On one November day the
grid that fed electricity to my laptop and heat to my living room went down.
It was a planned daylong outage required by BC Hydro to upgrade tension
lines crossing the water and connecting us to our nearest substation. Our
island’s elementary school closed and many of my fellow islanders caught
the morning ferries and went to town for the day. I stayed home. No emails,
no phone calls, no TV, no buzz, no noise. I read a book slowly, reviewed my
handwritten notes, played a board game with my daughter, and when it got
a bit chilly in the house we both went out for a long, heartwarming hike in
the forest.
    When dusk arrived we lit candles and huddled by our propane-fueled
hearth. The grid sprang back to life in the evening, but neither of us cared
much. I recalled Daniel’s words, spoken on Lasqueti Island two and a half
years before: “If you want to understand if you can pull it off, you should try
and go for a week or two without electricity of any kind. If you enjoy it, then
you can be off-the-grid.” It had only been one day, and I felt I would have
welcomed thirteen more.

